{"name": "Arthur Bergan", "content": "Arthur Theodore Bergan is a Canadian Civil Engineer (specializing in transportation engineering), a professor, and a leader in Canadian transportation safety research. He supervised the construction of numerous highways and was instrumental in the development of Transport Canada's Transportation Centres.  He also supervised the development of the Weigh-in-Motion Scale, designed to weigh vehicles passing over computer-assisted scales at speeds up to 70 miles per hour.\n Arthur Bergan was born in Assiniboia, Saskatchewan, where he joined the Saskatchewan Department of Highways, supervising the design and construction of highways. He attended the University of Saskatchewan, obtaining a bachelor's degree in Civil Engineering in 1961.\n After graduation, Dr. Bergan continued his road-building career, supervising the design and construction of highways, many in previously undeveloped regions in north and northeastern Saskatchewan. An estimated 500 miles of Saskatchewan highway were built under his supervision, through such challenging terrain as permafrost and muskeg.\n Dr. Bergan completed his master's degree in Civil Engineering at the UofS in 1964. He then began a career in academia with the University in the Department of Civil Engineering. At the same time, he continued to orchestrate many large road construction projects.\n In 1968, he took an educational leave to earn a Ph.D. in Civil Engineering for the Transport Institute of the University of California at Berkeley. Returning to teach at the UofS, over the years Dr. Bergan supervised 46 M.Sc. and Ph.D. students, a number of whom are now leaders in the transportation engineering field. He remains a respected mentor to his former students.\n Recognized as an international authority on transportation engineering, Dr. Bergan has authored numerous refereed journals and conference proceedings; served on many college, national and international professional committees; was appointed President of the Canadian Technical Asphalt Association; and served as Assistant Dean of the College of Engineering from 1978 to 1983. He is a member of the Association of Professional Engineers of Saskatchewan and many other engineering and transportation associations.\n Dr. Bergan was also instrumental in establishing a network of Transportation Centres across Canada, under the mandate of Transport Canada. The network has evolved into Canada's lead center of excellence in transportation safety research, with research centres located across Canada, including the University of Saskatchewan. The network continues to be active today, conducting vital research in traffic safety, with Dr. Bergan at the helm in Saskatchewan.\n In the late 1970s Dr. Bergan spearheaded the development of a weigh-in-motion scale, capable of weighing trucks traveling at highway speeds. This new technology led to the formation in 1980 of International Road Dynamics (IRD), a Saskatoon company specializing in the area of weigh-in-motion, commercial vehicle operations enforcement and intelligent transportation systems.\nUnder Dr. Bergan's 20 years of leadership as Chairman of the Board, IRD has become an international leader in Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS). The company produces and markets its technologies in over 30 countries around the world, generating gross annual revenues in excess of $20 million. IRD directly employs 140 people, and contracts with many local suppliers and trades people.[1]\n Development of Weigh-in-Motion Scale\nIn the late 1970s, transportation engineers under the direction of U of S Professor Art Bergan developed a prototype of automatic, weigh-in-motion scales. The technology is designed to weigh vehicles passing over computer-assisted scales at speeds up to 70 miles per hour, and with axle weights up to 50,000 pounds each. Similar scales using advanced technologies are now widely used throughout North America by International Road Dynamics, a company headed by Art Bergan's son, Terry.[2]\n Dr. Arthur Bergan placed on the College of Engineering 2007 Alumni Wall of Distinction\nDr. Arthur Bergan was honoured during Homecoming 2007 with a place on the College of Engineering Alumni Wall of Distinction. On September 14, College alumni and friends gathered in the Engineering Building for the unveiling of Bergan's photograph.\n\"Dr. Arthur Bergan is a professor, teacher, administrator, business person, colleague,\" Dean of Engineering Janusz Kozinski said at the event. \"He is a man of action.\" Born in Assiniboia, Bergan graduated from high school in 1949 and began working\nat the provincial Department of Highways in 1951. He earned his Civil Engineering degree from the College of Engineering in 1961, his Master of Science in Soil Mechanics in 1964, and a Ph.D. in Pavement Design for Heavy Loads from the\nUniversity of California Berkeley in the late '60's. Dr. Bergan's contributions as a College of Engineering faculty member are numerous.[citation needed] His enthusiasm for the College and its students is evident: he was a lead organizer of past College reunions and has already  ffered his assistance in planning for the 100th Anniversary of the College in 2012. Dr. Bergan continues to be a devoted mentor of students and colleagues.\n In the 1970's, Dr. Bergan was instrumental in establishing the University of Saskatchewan's Transportation Research Centre to conduct research and training in areas such as transportation systems, safety and economics. One of Dr. Bergan's first projects as the Centre's Director was a study of seatbelt effectiveness. In 1978, Saskatchewan became the first province in Canada to legislate the use of seatbelts. Dr. Bergan's most important success may very well be the lead role he has played in improving highway efficiency and safety. In 2003, he was inducted into the Saskatchewan Transportation Hall of Fame. Dr. Bergan is a modest man. \"I almost got played out listening to all of those kind words,\" he joked when it was his turn to step to the podium. \"I am honoured to take a place on the Wall with all of these distinguished alumni.\"[3]\n ", "tags": ["Transport engineers", "University of Saskatchewan alumni", "Living people", "1930s births", "All articles with dead external links", "Articles with dead external links from February 2016", "BLP articles lacking sources from February 2016", "All BLP articles lacking sources", "All articles with unsourced statements", "Articles with unsourced statements from May 2014", "Articles with dead external links from July 2017", "Articles with permanently dead external links"], "raw": "This biography of a living person needs additional citations for verification. Please help by adding reliable sources. Contentious material about living persons that is unsourced or poorly sourced must be removed immediately, especially if potentially libelous or harmful.Find sources:\u00a0\"Arthur Bergan\"\u00a0\u2013\u00a0news\u00a0\u00b7 newspapers\u00a0\u00b7 books\u00a0\u00b7 scholar\u00a0\u00b7 JSTOR (February 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)\nArthur Theodore Bergan is a Canadian Civil Engineer (specializing in transportation engineering), a professor, and a leader in Canadian transportation safety research. He supervised the construction of numerous highways and was instrumental in the development of Transport Canada's Transportation Centres.  He also supervised the development of the Weigh-in-Motion Scale, designed to weigh vehicles passing over computer-assisted scales at speeds up to 70 miles per hour.\n\nBiography[edit]\nArthur Bergan was born in Assiniboia, Saskatchewan, where he joined the Saskatchewan Department of Highways, supervising the design and construction of highways. He attended the University of Saskatchewan, obtaining a bachelor's degree in Civil Engineering in 1961.\nAfter graduation, Dr. Bergan continued his road-building career, supervising the design and construction of highways, many in previously undeveloped regions in north and northeastern Saskatchewan. An estimated 500 miles of Saskatchewan highway were built under his supervision, through such challenging terrain as permafrost and muskeg.\nDr. Bergan completed his master's degree in Civil Engineering at the UofS in 1964. He then began a career in academia with the University in the Department of Civil Engineering. At the same time, he continued to orchestrate many large road construction projects.\nIn 1968, he took an educational leave to earn a Ph.D. in Civil Engineering for the Transport Institute of the University of California at Berkeley. Returning to teach at the UofS, over the years Dr. Bergan supervised 46 M.Sc. and Ph.D. students, a number of whom are now leaders in the transportation engineering field. He remains a respected mentor to his former students.\nRecognized as an international authority on transportation engineering, Dr. Bergan has authored numerous refereed journals and conference proceedings; served on many college, national and international professional committees; was appointed President of the Canadian Technical Asphalt Association; and served as Assistant Dean of the College of Engineering from 1978 to 1983. He is a member of the Association of Professional Engineers of Saskatchewan and many other engineering and transportation associations.\nDr. Bergan was also instrumental in establishing a network of Transportation Centres across Canada, under the mandate of Transport Canada. The network has evolved into Canada's lead center of excellence in transportation safety research, with research centres located across Canada, including the University of Saskatchewan. The network continues to be active today, conducting vital research in traffic safety, with Dr. Bergan at the helm in Saskatchewan.\nIn the late 1970s Dr. Bergan spearheaded the development of a weigh-in-motion scale, capable of weighing trucks traveling at highway speeds. This new technology led to the formation in 1980 of International Road Dynamics (IRD), a Saskatoon company specializing in the area of weigh-in-motion, commercial vehicle operations enforcement and intelligent transportation systems.\nUnder Dr. Bergan's 20 years of leadership as Chairman of the Board, IRD has become an international leader in Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS). The company produces and markets its technologies in over 30 countries around the world, generating gross annual revenues in excess of $20 million. IRD directly employs 140 people, and contracts with many local suppliers and trades people.[1]\n\n\nDevelopment of Weigh-in-Motion Scale\nIn the late 1970s, transportation engineers under the direction of U of S Professor Art Bergan developed a prototype of automatic, weigh-in-motion scales. The technology is designed to weigh vehicles passing over computer-assisted scales at speeds up to 70 miles per hour, and with axle weights up to 50,000 pounds each. Similar scales using advanced technologies are now widely used throughout North America by International Road Dynamics, a company headed by Art Bergan's son, Terry.[2]\n\n\n\nDr. Arthur Bergan placed on the College of Engineering 2007 Alumni Wall of Distinction\nDr. Arthur Bergan was honoured during Homecoming 2007 with a place on the College of Engineering Alumni Wall of Distinction. On September 14, College alumni and friends gathered in the Engineering Building for the unveiling of Bergan's photograph.\n\"Dr. Arthur Bergan is a professor, teacher, administrator, business person, colleague,\" Dean of Engineering Janusz Kozinski said at the event. \"He is a man of action.\" Born in Assiniboia, Bergan graduated from high school in 1949 and began working\nat the provincial Department of Highways in 1951. He earned his Civil Engineering degree from the College of Engineering in 1961, his Master of Science in Soil Mechanics in 1964, and a Ph.D. in Pavement Design for Heavy Loads from the\nUniversity of California Berkeley in the late '60's. Dr. Bergan's contributions as a College of Engineering faculty member are numerous.[citation needed] His enthusiasm for the College and its students is evident: he was a lead organizer of past College reunions and has already  ffered his assistance in planning for the 100th Anniversary of the College in 2012. Dr. Bergan continues to be a devoted mentor of students and colleagues.\nIn the 1970's, Dr. Bergan was instrumental in establishing the University of Saskatchewan's Transportation Research Centre to conduct research and training in areas such as transportation systems, safety and economics. One of Dr. Bergan's first projects as the Centre's Director was a study of seatbelt effectiveness. In 1978, Saskatchewan became the first province in Canada to legislate the use of seatbelts. Dr. Bergan's most important success may very well be the lead role he has played in improving highway efficiency and safety. In 2003, he was inducted into the Saskatchewan Transportation Hall of Fame. Dr. Bergan is a modest man. \"I almost got played out listening to all of those kind words,\" he joked when it was his turn to step to the podium. \"I am honoured to take a place on the Wall with all of these distinguished alumni.\"[3]\n\n\nReferences[edit]\n\n\n^ \"IRD Chairman Honoured\". ITS Canada Newsletter. Intelligent Transportation Systems Society of Canada. Archived from the original on 6 July 2011. Retrieved 23 November 2010.\n\n^ \"Research - University of Saskatchewan\". Usask.ca. Retrieved 2016-02-21.\n\n^ [1][dead link]\n\n\nExternal links[edit]\nIrdinc.com\nUsask.ca[permanent dead link]\n\n\n\n"}