{"name": "Carlos A. Santos-Viola", "content": "Carlos Antonio Santos-Viola FPIA (born Carlos Santos-Viola y Antonio; April 8, 1912 \u2013 July 31, 1994) was an architect in the Philippines. He is best known for designing and building churches for the Iglesia ni Cristo (INC) religious group.\n Carlos was born in San Miguel, Bulacan and one of six children to Melecio de Guzman Santos and Miguela Magpitang Antonio.\n Starting from San Miguel Elementary School, Carlos moved on to the Ateneo de Manila to finish his high school education. While in Ateneo he joined the school band, and was quite active in basketball. Santos-Viola was one of the first graduates of the College of Architecture of the University of Santo Tomas in 1935. During this time the professors then were outstanding architects and engineers of the period, such as Tomas Arguelles, Tomas Mapua, Juan F. Nakpil, Fernando H. Ocampo, and Andres Luna de San Pedro.\n Santos-Viola worked in the office of Juan Nakpil after graduating. There he met Juan's youngest sister, Caridad, his future wife and mother to his children: Rosario, Milagros, Paz, Lourdes and Carlos, Jr.\n Shortly after World War II, he decided to open his own office in partnership with Alfredo J. Luz. In 1955, both parted ways and practiced separately.\n His first exposure to the INC group was executed under Nakpil's company through the Bishop's Palace in San Juan, Manila. INC gave the subsequent project directly to Santos-Viola. Although common elements may be visible, his designs were distinct from one another. Each structure was created on functionality that was built with integrity, adorned with 20th-century geometric forms garnished with Gothic revival and Baroque lines. Among those completed designs was the INC's central office in Quezon City. Architect Santos-Viola was the only Filipino Architect who designed churches that were built all over the Philippines.\n Carlos was a lifelong devout Catholic. He ministered for the Our Lady of Lourdes Church in Quezon City and was frequently invited to join the INC but repeatedly denied the invitations due to ideological differences. He also taught architecture at the college where he graduated, and helped found the Philippine Institute of Architects in 1938.\n The Iglesia ni Cristo in Cubao, Quezon City was the first building designed by Santos-Viola for the INC.\n The Iglesia ni Cristo Central Temple in Commonwealth Avenue, Diliman, Quezon City was the largest Chapel designed by Santos-Viola.\n Another unique design of Santos-Viola was the INC Central Office viewed through the spire of the Central Temple while under construction.\n ", "tags": ["1912 births", "1994 deaths", "Filipino architects", "Ateneo de Manila University alumni", "Filipino Roman Catholics", "Iglesia ni Cristo", "People from San Miguel, Bulacan", "People from Manila", "University of Santo Tomas alumni", "20th-century Filipino architects", "Articles with hCards", "AC with 0 elements"], "raw": "Carlos A. Santos-ViolaBornCarlos Santos-Viola y Antonio(1912-04-08)April 8, 1912San Miguel, Bulacan, Philippine IslandsDiedJuly 31, 1994(1994-07-31) (aged\u00a082)Quezon City, PhilippinesNationalityFilipinoAlma\u00a0materUniversity of Santo TomasOccupationArchitectSpouse(s)Caridad de Jesus NakpilChildrenRosarioMilagrosPazLourdesCarlos, Jr.Parent(s)Melecio de Guzman SantosMiguela Magpitang AntonioBuildingsErmita ChurchLourdes School of Quezon CityMandaluyong CityProjectsIglesia ni Cristo chapels\n\nCarlos Antonio Santos-Viola FPIA (born Carlos Santos-Viola y Antonio; April 8, 1912 \u2013 July 31, 1994) was an architect in the Philippines. He is best known for designing and building churches for the Iglesia ni Cristo (INC) religious group.\nCarlos was born in San Miguel, Bulacan and one of six children to Melecio de Guzman Santos and Miguela Magpitang Antonio.\nStarting from San Miguel Elementary School, Carlos moved on to the Ateneo de Manila to finish his high school education. While in Ateneo he joined the school band, and was quite active in basketball. Santos-Viola was one of the first graduates of the College of Architecture of the University of Santo Tomas in 1935. During this time the professors then were outstanding architects and engineers of the period, such as Tomas Arguelles, Tomas Mapua, Juan F. Nakpil, Fernando H. Ocampo, and Andres Luna de San Pedro.\nSantos-Viola worked in the office of Juan Nakpil after graduating. There he met Juan's youngest sister, Caridad, his future wife and mother to his children: Rosario, Milagros, Paz, Lourdes and Carlos, Jr.\nShortly after World War II, he decided to open his own office in partnership with Alfredo J. Luz. In 1955, both parted ways and practiced separately.\nHis first exposure to the INC group was executed under Nakpil's company through the Bishop's Palace in San Juan, Manila. INC gave the subsequent project directly to Santos-Viola. Although common elements may be visible, his designs were distinct from one another. Each structure was created on functionality that was built with integrity, adorned with 20th-century geometric forms garnished with Gothic revival and Baroque lines. Among those completed designs was the INC's central office in Quezon City. Architect Santos-Viola was the only Filipino Architect who designed churches that were built all over the Philippines.\nCarlos was a lifelong devout Catholic. He ministered for the Our Lady of Lourdes Church in Quezon City and was frequently invited to join the INC but repeatedly denied the invitations due to ideological differences. He also taught architecture at the college where he graduated, and helped found the Philippine Institute of Architects in 1938.\n\nGallery[edit]\n\n\n\n\nThe Iglesia ni Cristo in Cubao, Quezon City was the first building designed by Santos-Viola for the INC.\n\n\n\n\n\n\nThe Iglesia ni Cristo Central Temple in Commonwealth Avenue, Diliman, Quezon City was the largest Chapel designed by Santos-Viola.\n\n\n\n\n\n\nAnother unique design of Santos-Viola was the INC Central Office viewed through the spire of the Central Temple while under construction.\n\n\n\n\nExternal links[edit]\nBiographical Site\n\n\n\n"}