{"name": "James Garrison (architect)", "content": "James Garrison (born 1953 in Ridgeway, Pennsylvania) is an American architect and educator who lives, practices, and teaches in Brooklyn, New York.  He has two children, Emma Garrison, a marine biologist, and Brendan Garrison, a writer.  \n While growing up in western Pennsylvania, Garrison witnessed nature destroyed by surface mining and clear cutting. \u00a0 This led to a continuing dedication to ecological protection and an ever greater understanding of sustainability in architecture.\u00a0 In 1971 he attended the Syracuse University School of Architecture and there researched new forms of urban housing under the mentorship of Werner Seligman, graduating with design honors. \u00a0 While at Syracuse he apprenticed with modernists Lewis Skoler and Kermit Lee who conveyed a strong progressive ethos for architecture and society.\n Garrison joined James Stewart Polshek and Associates, NYC, in 1978 becoming a partner in the succeeding firm, the Polshek Partnership, in 1989.  He began to teach and conduct research in building design and technology  at Columbia University in 1984 where he taught core studios and directed the architectural technology curriculum until 1992.  He has taught at the Pratt institute since 2008 concentrating on core graduate studios and specialized seminar investigations into industrialized building systems and sustainability.\n After the rapid growth of Polshek and Partners in the 1980\u2019s Garrison established Garrison Architects, a studio-based practice that seeks to create a synthesis of art, sustainability, and engineering.\u00a0  Garrison Architects practice is purposefully diverse with regard to program, scale, material and form.\u00a0 The work is guided by the conviction that the architect must understand and control the building process from design through construction. Valuing craftsmanship as well as digital precision Garrison looks to embrace the human connection to making, whether building of masonry or assembling prefabricated components.   This approach includes prefabrication, climate specific design, solar induced ventilation,  embodied energy reduction and net zero programs for energy, waste, and water.  Work in prefabrication has focused on volumetric modular structures and includes the use of industrial design and engineering methods to create sustainable, affordable and highly evolved architectural systems.\n Garrisons first building to gain national recognition was 500 Park Avenue, designed while he was with James Stewart Polshek and Associates.\u00a0 It drew on his academic work as it sought to demonstrate the potential for modern architecture to re-integrate the fabric of the city. Located at 59th Street and Park Avenue in Manhattan it synthesized the glass architecture of the postwar era with the masonry of the surrounding pre-war apartment houses.\u00a0 It was heralded by Ada Louise Huxtable as an exemplar of contextual design and received an honor award from the American Institute of Architects.\n In 2008 Garrison Architects received the commission to design the Syracuse University School of Architecture.\u00a0 With 34 extremely involved faculty, a very limited budget, and a damaged but promising early 20th century building it presented a significant challenge. The design process unfolded with an analysis to discover how the building might foster identity and communication while increasing the Schools visibility in the surrounding University.  This process also revealed  the buildings abandoned solar actuated ventilation system and has led to the greater understanding and use of this approach.  Garrison Architects was awarded a NYC AIA design award for this project.\n The Pod Hotel, completed in 2018 in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, is the firms largest  and most complex modular building to date. It places 250 prefabricated modular micro hotel rooms, restaurants, and commercial space within an irregular urban site.  The design includes seven interconnected garden courts and four green rooftop terraces with photovoltaic canopies.\n Garrison Architects completed works also include U.S. Principal Officers Residence in Samoa,  the  Irish Repertory Theatre, NY, NY, the  East Elmhurst Branch Library, Queens, NY, Roberto Clemente Plaza, Bronx, NY, the Iversen Kaplan Residence, Princeton, NJ, and Restoration Plaza in Bedford Stuyvesant,  Brooklyn NY.   \n Modular structures include the NYC Emergency Housing Prototype for the Office of Emergency Management;  the NYC Parks Beach Restoration Modules, mobile drone control and observation modules for Verizon Communications, the Lehman College Child Care Center, and the Milan Case Study Houses.\n Work in production and construction in the fall of 2020 includes the Staten Island Animal Shelter, Staten Island, NY, Newark Makerhoods, Newark, NJ,  the Piaule Landscape Hotel, Catskill, NY, LIghthouse Point, Staten Island, NY, The 76 Modular Triple Net Zero Housing, Albany, NY, the Aspinwall/Willich Residence, Hudson, NY and the Lavrik/Paprocki Residence, Milan, NY.\n \n ", "tags": ["Syracuse University School of Architecture alumni", "1953 births", "Living people", "Architects from New York City", "Architects from Pennsylvania", "Parsons School of Design faculty", "Articles with short description", "Short description matches Wikidata", "BLP articles lacking sources from December 2011", "All BLP articles lacking sources", "Articles with peacock terms from September 2017", "All articles with peacock terms", "Articles with multiple maintenance issues", "Wikipedia articles with ISNI identifiers", "Wikipedia articles with ULAN identifiers", "Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiers", "Wikipedia articles with WORLDCATID identifiers"], "raw": "American architect\nThis article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages)\n\nThis biography of a living person needs additional citations for verification. Please help by adding reliable sources. Contentious material about living persons that is unsourced or poorly sourced must be removed immediately, especially if potentially libelous or harmful.Find sources:\u00a0\"James Garrison\"\u00a0architect\u00a0\u2013\u00a0news\u00a0\u00b7 newspapers\u00a0\u00b7 books\u00a0\u00b7 scholar\u00a0\u00b7 JSTOR (December 2011) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)\nThis article contains wording that promotes the subject in a subjective manner without imparting real information. Please remove or replace such wording and instead of making proclamations about a subject's importance, use facts and attribution to demonstrate that importance. (September 2017) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)\n\n (Learn how and when to remove this template message)\nJames Garrison (born 1953 in Ridgeway, Pennsylvania) is an American architect and educator who lives, practices, and teaches in Brooklyn, New York.  He has two children, Emma Garrison, a marine biologist, and Brendan Garrison, a writer.  \nWhile growing up in western Pennsylvania, Garrison witnessed nature destroyed by surface mining and clear cutting. \u00a0 This led to a continuing dedication to ecological protection and an ever greater understanding of sustainability in architecture.\u00a0 In 1971 he attended the Syracuse University School of Architecture and there researched new forms of urban housing under the mentorship of Werner Seligman, graduating with design honors. \u00a0 While at Syracuse he apprenticed with modernists Lewis Skoler and Kermit Lee who conveyed a strong progressive ethos for architecture and society.\nGarrison joined James Stewart Polshek and Associates, NYC, in 1978 becoming a partner in the succeeding firm, the Polshek Partnership, in 1989.  He began to teach and conduct research in building design and technology  at Columbia University in 1984 where he taught core studios and directed the architectural technology curriculum until 1992.  He has taught at the Pratt institute since 2008 concentrating on core graduate studios and specialized seminar investigations into industrialized building systems and sustainability.\nAfter the rapid growth of Polshek and Partners in the 1980\u2019s Garrison established Garrison Architects, a studio-based practice that seeks to create a synthesis of art, sustainability, and engineering.\u00a0  Garrison Architects practice is purposefully diverse with regard to program, scale, material and form.\u00a0 The work is guided by the conviction that the architect must understand and control the building process from design through construction. Valuing craftsmanship as well as digital precision Garrison looks to embrace the human connection to making, whether building of masonry or assembling prefabricated components.   This approach includes prefabrication, climate specific design, solar induced ventilation,  embodied energy reduction and net zero programs for energy, waste, and water.  Work in prefabrication has focused on volumetric modular structures and includes the use of industrial design and engineering methods to create sustainable, affordable and highly evolved architectural systems.\nGarrisons first building to gain national recognition was 500 Park Avenue, designed while he was with James Stewart Polshek and Associates.\u00a0 It drew on his academic work as it sought to demonstrate the potential for modern architecture to re-integrate the fabric of the city. Located at 59th Street and Park Avenue in Manhattan it synthesized the glass architecture of the postwar era with the masonry of the surrounding pre-war apartment houses.\u00a0 It was heralded by Ada Louise Huxtable as an exemplar of contextual design and received an honor award from the American Institute of Architects.\nIn 2008 Garrison Architects received the commission to design the Syracuse University School of Architecture.\u00a0 With 34 extremely involved faculty, a very limited budget, and a damaged but promising early 20th century building it presented a significant challenge. The design process unfolded with an analysis to discover how the building might foster identity and communication while increasing the Schools visibility in the surrounding University.  This process also revealed  the buildings abandoned solar actuated ventilation system and has led to the greater understanding and use of this approach.  Garrison Architects was awarded a NYC AIA design award for this project.\nThe Pod Hotel, completed in 2018 in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, is the firms largest  and most complex modular building to date. It places 250 prefabricated modular micro hotel rooms, restaurants, and commercial space within an irregular urban site.  The design includes seven interconnected garden courts and four green rooftop terraces with photovoltaic canopies.\nGarrison Architects completed works also include U.S. Principal Officers Residence in Samoa,  the  Irish Repertory Theatre, NY, NY, the  East Elmhurst Branch Library, Queens, NY, Roberto Clemente Plaza, Bronx, NY, the Iversen Kaplan Residence, Princeton, NJ, and Restoration Plaza in Bedford Stuyvesant,  Brooklyn NY.   \nModular structures include the NYC Emergency Housing Prototype for the Office of Emergency Management;  the NYC Parks Beach Restoration Modules, mobile drone control and observation modules for Verizon Communications, the Lehman College Child Care Center, and the Milan Case Study Houses.\nWork in production and construction in the fall of 2020 includes the Staten Island Animal Shelter, Staten Island, NY, Newark Makerhoods, Newark, NJ,  the Piaule Landscape Hotel, Catskill, NY, LIghthouse Point, Staten Island, NY, The 76 Modular Triple Net Zero Housing, Albany, NY, the Aspinwall/Willich Residence, Hudson, NY and the Lavrik/Paprocki Residence, Milan, NY.\n\n\nExternal links[edit]\n\"Towards a Sustainable Architecture\" by James Garrison, in Scapes 2005\nGarrison Architects Homepage\nModern Modular Architect blog by Garrison Architects\nJames Garrison Homepage at Parsons\n\"Renowned Architect Designs With Nature in Mind,\" Real Estate Weekly\nAuthority control \nISNI: 0000 0000 7045 4834\nULAN: 500086048\nVIAF: 315532633\n WorldCat Identities: viaf-315532633\n\n\n\n\n"}