{"name": "Chanakya", "content": "\n Chanakya (IAST: C\u0101\u1e47akya, pronunciation\u00a0(help\u00b7info)) was an ancient Indian teacher, philosopher, economist, jurist and royal advisor. He is traditionally identified as Kau\u1e6dilya or Vishnugupta, who authored the ancient Indian political treatise, the Arthashastra,[3] a text dated to roughly between the 4th century BCE and the 3rd century CE.[4] As such, he is considered the pioneer of the field of political science and economics in India, and his work is thought of as an important precursor to classical economics.[5][6][7][8] His works were lost near the end of the Gupta Empire in the 6th century CE and not rediscovered until the early 20th century.[6]\n Chanakya assisted the first Mauryan emperor Chandragupta in his rise to power. He is widely credited for having played an important role in the establishment of the Maurya Empire. Chanakya served as the chief advisor to both emperors Chandragupta and his son Bindusara.\n There is little documented historical information about Chanakya: most of what is known about him comes from semi-legendary accounts. Thomas Trautmann identifies four distinct accounts of the ancient Chanakya-Chandragupta katha (legend):[9]\n In all the four versions, Chanakya feels insulted by the Nanda king, and vows to destroy him. After dethroning the Nanda, he installs Chandragupta as the new king.\n The ancient Arthashastra has been traditionally attributed to Chanakya by a number of scholars. The Arthashastra identifies its author as Kau\u1e6dilya, a gotra or clan name, except for one verse that refers to him by the personal name of Vishnugupta.[19] Kau\u1e6dilya is presumably the name of the author's gotra (clan).[20]\n One of the earliest Sanskrit literatures to identify Chanakya with Vishnugupta explicitly was the Panchatantra.[21][need quotation to verify]\n K. C. Ojha proposes that the traditional identification of Vishnugupta with Kau\u1e6dilya was caused by a confusion of the text's editor and its originator. He suggests that Vishnugupta was a redactor of the original work of Kau\u1e6dilya.[3] Thomas Burrow suggests that Chanakya and Kau\u1e6dilya may have been two different people.[22]\n According to the Buddhist legend, the Nanda kings who preceded Chandragupta were robbers-turned-rulers.[10] Chanakya (IAST: C\u0101\u1e47akka in Mahavamsa) was a Brahmin from Takk\u0101sila (Takshashila). He was well-versed in three Vedas and politics. He had canine teeth, which were believed to be a mark of royalty. His mother feared that he would neglect her after becoming a king.[2] To pacify her, Chanakya broke his teeth.[23]\n Chanakya was said to be ugly, accentuated by his broken teeth and crooked feet. One day, the king Dhana Nanda organized an alms-giving ceremony for Brahmins. Chanakya went to Pupphapura (Pushpapura) to attend this ceremony. Disgusted by his appearance, the king ordered him to be thrown out of the assembly. Chanakya broke his sacred thread in anger, and cursed the king. The king ordered his arrest, but Chanakya escaped in the disguise of an \u0100j\u012bvika. He befriended Dhananada's son Pabbata, and instigated him to seize the throne. With help of a signet ring given by the prince, Chanakya fled the palace through a secret door.[23]\n Chanakya escaped to the Vinjha forest. There, he made 800 million gold coins (kahapanas), using a secret technique that allowed him to turn 1 coin into 8 coins. After hiding this money, he started searching for a person worthy of replacing Dhana Nanda.[23] One day, he saw a group of children playing: the young Chandragupta (called Chandagutta in Mahavamsa) played the role of a king, while other boys pretended to be vassals, ministers, or robbers. The \"robbers\" were brought before Chandragupta, who ordered their limbs to be cut off, but then miraculously re-attached them. Chandragupta had been born in a royal family, but was brought up by a hunter after his father was killed by an usurper, and the devatas caused his mother to abandon him. Astonished by the boy's miraculous powers, Chanakya paid 1000 gold coins to his foster-father, and took Chandragupta away, promising to teach him a trade.[24]\n Chanakya had two potential successors to Dhana Nanda: Pabbata and Chandragupta. He gave each of them an amulet to be worn around the neck with a woolen thread. One day, he decided to test them. While Chandragupta was asleep, he asked Pabbata to remove Chandragupta's woolen thread without breaking it and without waking up Chandragupta. Pabbata failed to accomplish this task. Some time later, when Pabbata was sleeping, Chanakya challenged Chandragupta to complete the same task. Chandragupta retrieved the woolen thread by cutting off Pabbata's head. For the next seven years, Chanakya trained Chandragupta for royal duties. When Chandragupta became an adult, Chanakya dug up his hidden treasure of gold coins, and assembled an army.[24]\n The army of Chanadragupta and Chanakya invaded Dhana Nanda's kingdom, but disbanded after facing a severe defeat. While wandering in disguise, the two men once listened to the conversation between a woman and her son. The child had eaten the middle of a cake, and thrown away the edges. The woman scolded him, saying that he was eating food like Chandragupta, who attacked the central part of the kingdom instead of conquering the border villages first. Chanakya and Chandragupta realized their mistake. They assembled a new army, and started conquering the border villages. Gradually, they advanced to the kingdom's capital Pataliputra (P\u0101\u1e6daliputta in Mahavamsa), where they killed the king Dhana Nanda. Chanakya ordered a fisherman to find the place where Dhana Nanda had hidden his treasure. As soon as the fishermen informed Chanakya about its location, Chanakya had him killed. Chanakya anointed Chandragupta as the new king, and tasked a man named Pa\u1e47iyatappa with eliminating rebels and robbers from the kingdom.[25]\n Chanakya started mixing small doses of poison in the new king's food to make him immune to poisoning attempts by the enemies. Chandragupta, who was not aware of this, once shared the food with his pregnant queen, who was seven days away from delivery. Chanakya arrived just as the queen ate the poisoned morsel. Realizing that she was going to die, Chanakya decided to save the unborn child. He cut off the queen's head and cut open her belly with a sword to take out the foetus. Over the next seven days, he placed the foetus in the belly of a goat freshly killed each day. After seven days, Chandragupta's son was \"born\". He was named Bindusara, because his body was spotted with drops (bindu) of goat's blood.[25]\n The earliest Buddhist legends do not mention Chanakya in their description of the Mauryan dynasty after this point.[24] Dhammapala's commentary on Theragatha, however, mentions a legend about Chanakya and a Brahmin named Subandhu. According to this account, Chanakya was afraid that the wise Subandhu would surpass him at Chandragupta's court. So, he got Chandragupta to imprison Subandhu, whose son Tekicchakani escaped and became a Buddhist monk.[26] The 16th-century Tibetan Buddhist author Taranatha mentions Chanakya as one of Bindusara's \"great lords\". According to him, Chanakya destroyed the nobles and kings of 16 towns and made Bindusara the master of all the territory between the eastern and the western seas (Arabian Sea and the Bay of Bengal).[27]\n According to the Jain account, Chanakya was born to two lay Jains (shravaka) named Chanin and Chaneshvari. His birthplace was the Chanaka village in Golla vishaya (region).[1] The identity of \"Golla\" is not certain, but Hemachandra states that Chanakya was a Dramila, implying that he was a native of South India.[28]\n Chanakya was born with a full set of teeth. According to the monks, this was a sign that he would become a king in the future. Chanin did not want his son to become haughty, so he broke Chanakya's teeth. The monks prophesied that the baby would go on to become a power behind the throne.[1] Chanakya grew up to be a learned shravaka, and married a Brahmin woman. Her relatives mocked her for being married to a poor man. This motivated Chanakya to visit Pataliputra, and seek donations from the king Nanda, who was famous for his generosity towards Brahmins. While waiting for the king at the royal court, Chanakya sat on the king's throne. A dasi (servant girl) courteously offered Chanakya the next seat, but Chanakya kept his kamandal (water pot) on it, while remaining seated on the throne. The servant offered him a choice of four more seats, but each time, he kept his various items on the seats, refusing to budge from the throne. Finally, the annoyed servant kicked him off the throne. Enraged, Chanakya vowed to uproot Nanda and his entire establishment, like \"a great wind uproots a tree\".[29]\n Chanakya knew that he was prophesied to become a power behind the throne. So, he started searching for a person worthy of being a king. While wandering, he did a favour for the pregnant daughter of a village chief, on the condition that her child would belong to him. Chandragupta was born to this lady. When Chandragupta grew up, Chanakya came to his village and saw him playing \"king\" among a group of boys. To test him, Chanakya asked him for a donation. The boy told Chanakya to take the cows nearby, declaring that nobody would disobey his order. This display of power convinced Chanakya that Chandragupta was the one worthy of being a king.[1]\n Chanakya took Chandragupta to conquer Pataliputra, the capital of Nanda. He assembled an army using the wealth he had acquired through alchemy (dhatuvada-visaradan). The army suffered a severe defeat, forcing Chanakya and Chandragupta to flee the battlefield. They reached a lake while being pursued by an enemy officer. Chanakya asked Chandragupta to jump into the lake, and disguised himself as a meditating ascetic. When the enemy soldier reached the lake, he asked the 'ascetic' if he had seen Chandragupta. Chanakya pointed at the lake. As the soldier removed his armour to jump into the lake, Chanakya took his sword and killed him. When Chandragupta came out of the water, Chanakya asked him, \"What went through your mind, when I disclosed your location to the enemy?\" Chandragupta replied that he trusted his master to make the best decision. This convinced Chanakya that Chandragupta would remain under his influence even after becoming the king. On another occasion, Chanakya similarly escaped the enemy by chasing away a washerman, and disguising himself as one. Once, he cut open the belly of a Brahmin who had just eaten food, and took out the food to feed a hungry Chandragupta.[30]\n One day, Chanakya and Chandragupta overheard a woman scolding her son. The child had burnt his finger by putting it in the middle of a bowl of hot gruel. The woman told her son that by not starting from the cooler edges, he was being foolish like Chanakya, who attacked the capital before conquering the bordering regions. Chanakya realized his mistake, and made a new plan to defeat Nanda. He formed an alliance with Parvataka, the king of a mountain kingdom called Himavatkuta, offering him half of Nanda's kingdom.[30]\n After securing Parvataka's help, Chanakya and Chandragupta started besieging the towns other than Pataliputra. One particular town offered a strong resistance. Chanakya entered this town disguised as a Shaivite mendicant, and declared that the siege would end if the idols of the seven mothers were removed from the town's temple. As soon as the superstitious defenders removed the idols from the temple, Chanakya ordered his army to end the siege. When the defenders started celebrating their victory, Chanakya's army launched a surprise attack and captured the town.[30]\n Gradually, Chanakya and Chandragupta subdued all the regions outside the capital. Finally, they captured Pataliputra and Chandragupta became the king. They allowed the king Nanda to go into exile, with all the goods he could take on a cart. As Nanda and his family were leaving the city on a cart, his daughter saw Chandragupta, and fell in love with the new king. She chose him as her husband by svayamvara tradition. As she was getting off the cart, 9 spokes of the cart's wheel broke. Interpreting this as an omen, Chanakya declared that Chandragupta's dynasty would last for 9 generations.[30]\n Meanwhile, Parvataka fell in love with one of Nanda's visha kanyas (poison girl). Chanakya approved the marriage, and Parvataka collapsed when he touched the girl during the wedding. Chanakya asked Chandragupta not to call a physician. Thus, Parvataka died and Chandragupta became the sole ruler of Nanda's territories.[31]\n Chanakya then started consolidating the power by eliminating Nanda's loyalists, who had been harassing people in various parts of the kingdom. Chanakya learned about a weaver who would burn any part of his house infested with cockroaches. Chanakya assigned the responsibility of crushing the rebels to this weaver. Soon, the kingdom was free of insurgents. Chanakya also burned a village that had refused him food in the past. He filled the royal treasury by inviting rich merchants to his home, getting them drunk and gambling with a loaded dice.[31]\n Once, the kingdom suffered a 12-year long famine. Two young Jain monks started eating from the king's plate, after making themselves invisible with a magic ointment. Chanakya sensed their presence by covering the palace floor with a powder, and tracing their footprints. At the next meal, he caught them by filling the dining room with thick smoke, which caused the monks' eyes to water, washing off the ointment. Chanakya complained about the young monks behavior to the head monk Acharya Susthita. The Acharya blamed people for not being charitable towards monks, so Chanakya started giving generous alms to the monks.[31]\n Meanwhile, Chandragupta had been patronizing the non-Jain monks. Chanakya decided to prove to him that these men were not worthy of his patronage. He covered the floor of the palace area near the women's rooms with a powder, and left the non-Jain monks there. Their footprints showed that they had sneaked up to the windows of the women's rooms to peep inside. The Jain monks, who were assessed using the same method, stayed away from the women's rooms. After seeing this, Chandragupta appointed the Jain monks as his spiritual counsellors.[32]\n Chanakya used to mix small doses of poison in Chandragupta's food to make him immune to poisoning attempts. The king, unaware of this, once shared his food with Queen Durdhara. Chanakya entered the room at the instant she died. He cut open the dead queen's belly and took out the baby. The baby, who had been touched by a drop (\"bindu\") of the poison, was named Bindusara.[32]\n After Chandragupta abdicated the throne to become a Jain monk, Chanakya anointed Bindusara as the new king.[32] Chanakya asked Bindusara to appoint a man named Subandhu as one of his ministers. However, Subandhu wanted to become a higher minister and grew jealous of Chanakya. So, he told Bindusara that Chanakya was responsible for the death of his mother. Bindusara confirmed the allegations with the nurses, who told him that Chanakya had cut open the belly of his mother. And enraged Bindusara started hating Chanakya. As a result, Chanakya, who had grown very old by this time, retired and decided to starve himself to death. Meanwhile, Bindusara came to know about the detailed circumstances of his birth, and implored Chanakya to resume his ministerial duties. After failing to pacify Chanakya, the emperor ordered Subandhu to convince Chanakya to give up his suicide plan. Subandhu, while pretending to appease Chanakya, burned him to death. Subandhu then took possession of Chanakya's home. Chanakya had anticipated this, and before retiring, he had set up a cursed trap for Subandhu. He had left behind a chest with a hundred locks. Subandhu broke the locks, hoping to find precious jewels. He found a sweet-smelling perfume and immediately inhaled it. But then his eyes fell on a birch bark note with a curse written on it. The note declared that anybody who smelled this perfume will have to either become a monk or face death. Subandhu tested the perfume on another man, and then fed him luxurious food (something that the monks abstain from). The man died, and then Subandhu was forced to become a monk to avoid death.[33][34]\n According to another Jain text \u2013 the Rajavali-Katha \u2013 Chanakya accompanied Chandragupta to forest for retirement, once Bindusara became the king.[35]\n The Kashmiri version of the legend goes like this: Vararuchi (identified with Katyayana), Indradatta and Vyadi were three disciples of the sage Varsha. Once, on behalf of their guru Varsha, they traveled to Ayodhya to seek a gurudakshina (guru's fee) from king Nanda. As they arrived to meet Nanda, the king died. Using his yogic powers, Indradatta entered Nanda's body, and granted Vararuchi's request for 10 million dinars (gold coins). The royal minister Shakatala realized what was happening, and had Indradatta's body burnt. But before he could take any action against the fake king (Indradatta in Nanda's body, also called Yogananda), the king had him arrested. Shakatala and his 100 sons were imprisoned, and were given food sufficient only for one person. Shakatala's 100 sons starved to death, so that their father could live to take revenge.[36]\n Meanwhile, the fake king appointed Vararuchi as his minister. As the king's character kept deteriorating, a disgusted Vararuchi retired to a forest as an ascetic. Shakatala was then restored as the minister, but kept planning his revenge. One day, Shakatala came across Chanakya, a Brahmin who was uprooting all the grass in his path, because one blade of the grass had pricked his foot. Shakatala realized that he could use a man so vengeful to destroy the fake king. He invited Chanakya to the king's assembly, promising him 100,000 gold coins for presiding over a ritual ceremony.[36]\n Shakatala hosted Chanakya in his own house, and treated him with great respect. But the day Chanakya arrived at the king's court, Shakatala got another Brahmin named Subandhu to preside over the ceremony. Chanakya felt insulted, but Shakatala blamed the king for this dishonour. Chanakya then untied his topknot (sikha), and vowed not to re-tie it until the king was destroyed. The king ordered his arrest, but he escaped to Shakatala's house. There, using materials supplied by Shakatala, he performed a magic ritual which made the king sick. The king died of fever after 7 days.[37]\n Shakatala then executed Hiranyagupta, the son of the fake king. He anointed Chandragupta, the son of the real king Nanda, as the new king (in Kshemendra's version, it is Chanakya who installs Chandragupta as the new king). Shakatala also appointed Chanakya as the royal priest (purohita). Having achieved his revenge, he then retired to the forest as an ascetic.[37]\n According to the Mudrarakshasa version, the king Nanda once removed Chanakya from the \"first seat of the kingdom\" (this possibly refers to Chanakya's expulsion from the king's assembly). For this reason, Chanakya vowed not to tie his top knot (shikha) until the complete destruction of Nanda. Chanakya made a plan to dethrone Nanda, and replace him with Chandragupta, his son by a lesser queen. Chanakya engineered Chandragupta's alliance with another powerful king Parvateshvara (or Parvata), and the two rulers agreed to divide Nanda's territory after subjugating him. Their allied army included Bahlika, Kirata, Parasika, Kamboja, Shaka, and Yavana soldiers. The army invaded Pataliputra (Kusumapura) and defeated the Nandas.[38] Parvata is identified with King Porus by some scholars.[39]\n Nanda's prime minister Rakshasa escaped Pataliputra, and continued resisting the invaders. He sent a vishakanya (poison girl) to assassinate Chandragupta. Chanakya had this girl assassinate Parvata instead, with the blame going to Rakshasa. However, Parvata's son Malayaketu learned the truth about his father's death, and defected to Rakshasa's camp. Chanakya's spy Bhagurayana accompanied Malayaketu, pretending to be his friend.[40]\n Rakshasa continued to plot Chandragupta's death, but all his plans were foiled by Chanakya. For example, once Rakshasa arranged for assassins to be transported to Chandragupta's bedroom via a tunnel. Chanakya became aware of them by noticing a trail of ants carrying the leftovers of their food. He then arranged for the assassins to be burned to death.[41]\n Meanwhile, Parvata's brother Vairodhaka became the ruler of his kingdom. Chanakya convinced him that Rakshasa was responsible for killing his brother, and agreed to share half of Nanda's kingdom with him. Secretly, however, Chanakya hatched a plan to get Vairodhaka killed. He knew that the chief architect of Pataliputra was a Rakshasa loyalist. He asked this architect to build a triumphal arch for Chandragupta's procession to the royal palace. He arranged the procession to be held at midnight citing astrological reasons, but actually to ensure poor visibility. He then invited Vairodhaka to lead the procession on Chandragupta's elephant, and accompanied by Chandragupta's bodyguards. As expected, Rakshasa's loyalists arranged for the arch to fall on who they thought was Chandragupta. Vairodhaka was killed, and once again, the assassination was blamed on Rakshasa.[40]\n Malayaketu and Rakshasa then formed an alliance with five kings: Chiravarman of Kauluta (Kulu), Meghaksha of Parasika, Narasimha of Malaya, Pushkaraksha of Kashmira, and Sindhusena of Saindhava. This allied army also included soldiers from Chedi, Gandhara, Hunas, Khasa, Magadha, Shaka, and Yavana territories.[41]\n In Pataliputra, Chanakya's agent informed him that three Rakshasa loyalists remained in the capital: the Jain monk Jiva-siddhi, the scribe Shakata-dasa and the jewelers' guild chief Chandana-dasa. Of these, Jiva-siddhi was actually a spy of Chanakya, unknown to his other spies. Chandana-dasa sheltered Rakshasa's wife, who once unknowingly dropped her husband's signet-ring (mudra). Chanakya's agent got hold of this signet-ring, and brought it to Chanakya. Using this signet ring, Chanakya sent a letter to Malayaketu warning him that his allies were treacherous. Chanakya also asked some of Chandragupta's princes to fake defection to Malayaketu's camp. In addition, Chanakya ordered Shakata-dasa's murder, but had him 'rescued' by Siddharthaka, a spy pretending to be an agent of Chandana-dasa. Chanakya's spy then took Shakata-dasa to Rakshasa.[41]\n When Shakata-dasa and his 'rescuer' Siddharthaka reached Rakshasa, Siddharthaka presented him the signet-ring, claiming to have found it at Chandana-dasa's home. As a reward, Rakshasa gave him some jewels that Malayaketu had gifted him. Sometime after this, another of Chanakya's agents, disguised as a jeweler, sold Parvata's jewels to Rakshasa.[42]\n Sometime later, Rakshasa sent his spies disguised as musicians to Chandragupta's court. But Chanakya knew all about Rakshasa's plans thanks to his spies. In front of Rakshasa's spies, Chanakya and Chandragupta feigned an angry argument. Chandragupta pretended to dismiss Chanakya, and declared that Rakshasa would make a better minister. Meanwhile, Malayaketu had a conversation with Chanakya's spy Bhagurayana while approaching Rakshasa's house. Bhagurayana made Malayaketu distrustful of Rakshasa, by saying that Rakshasa hated only Chanakya, and would be willing to serve Nanda's son Chandragupta. Shortly after this, a messenger came to Rakshasa's house, and informed him that Chandragupta had dismissed Chanakya while praising him. This convinced Malayaketu that Rakashasa could not be trusted.[42]\n Malayaketu then decided to invade Pataliputra without Rakshasa by his side. He consulted the Jain monk Jiva-siddhi to decide an auspicious time for beginning the march. Jiva-siddhi, a spy of Chanakya, told him that he could start immediately.[42] Jiva-siddhi also convinced him that Rakshasa was responsible for his father's death, but Bhagurayana persuaded him not to harm Rakshasa. Shortly after, Chanakya's spy Siddharthaka pretended to get caught with a fake letter addressed to Chandragupta by Rakshasa. Wearing the jewels given by Rakshasa, he pretended to be an agent of Rakshasa. The letter, sealed with Rakshasa's signet-ring, informed Chandragupta that Rakshasa only wished to replace Chanakya as the prime minister. It also stated that five of Malayaketu's allies were willing to defect to Chandragupta in return for land and wealth. An angry Malayaketu summoned Rakshasa, who arrived wearing Parvata's jewels that Chanakya's agent had sold him. When Malayaketu saw Rakshasa wearing his father's jewels, he was convinced that there was indeed a treacherous plan against him. He executed his five allies in a brutal manner.[43]\n The rest of Malayaketu's allies deserted him, disgusted at his treatment of the five slayed allies. Rakshasa managed to escape, tracked by Chanakya's spies. One of Chanakya's spies, disguised as a friend of Chandana-dasa, got in touch with him. He told Rakshasa that Chandana-dasa was about to be executed for refusing to divulge the location of Rakshasa's family. On hearing this, Rakshasa rushed to Pataliputra to surrender and save the life of his loyal friend Chandana-dasa. When he reached Pataliputra, Chanakya, pleased with his loyalty to Chandana-dasa, offered him clemency. Rakshasa pledged allegiance to Chandragupta and agreed to be his prime minister, in return for release of Chandana-dasa and a pardon for Malayaketu. Chanakya then bound his top knot, having achieved his objective, and retired.[43]\n - Shiv Shankar Menon, National Security Advisor[48]\n Chanakya is regarded as a great thinker and diplomat in India. Many Indian nationalists regard him as one of the earliest people who envisioned a united India spanning the entire subcontinent. India's former National Security Advisor Shiv Shankar Menon praised Chanakya's Arthashastra for its precise and timeless descriptions of power. Furthermore, he recommended reading of the book for broadening the vision on strategic issues.[48]\n The diplomatic enclave in New Delhi is named Chanakyapuri in honour of Chanakya. Institutes named after him include Training Ship Chanakya, Chanakya National Law University and Chanakya Institute of Public Leadership. Chanakya circle in Mysore has been named after him.[49][self-published source?]\n Several modern adaptations of the legend of Chanakya narrate his story in a semi-fictional form, extending these legends. In Chandragupta (1911), a play by Dwijendralal Ray, the Nanda king exiles his half-brother Chandragupta, who joins the army of Alexander the Great. Later, with help from Chanakya and Katyayan (the former Prime Minister of Magadha), Chandragupta defeats Nanda, who is put to death by Chanakya.[50]\n ", "tags": ["4th-century BC Indian philosophers", "Ancient Indian military writers", "Hindu philosophers", "Military theorists", "People of the Maurya Empire", "Preclassical economists", "Taxila Tehsil", "CS1 maint: others", "CS1 Bengali-language sources (bn)", "Articles with short description", "Short description is different from Wikidata", "Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalism", "Use Indian English from March 2013", "All Wikipedia articles written in Indian English", "Use dmy dates from November 2020", "Articles with hCards", "Articles with hAudio microformats", "Pages including recorded pronunciations", "Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from April 2019", "All articles lacking reliable references", "Articles lacking reliable references from March 2016", "All articles with self-published sources", "Articles with self-published sources from February 2020", "CS1: long volume value", "Wikipedia articles with BIBSYS identifiers", "Wikipedia articles with BNE identifiers", "Wikipedia articles with BNF identifiers", "Wikipedia articles with CINII identifiers", "Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers", "Wikipedia articles with ISNI identifiers", "Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiers", "Wikipedia articles with NDL identifiers", "Wikipedia articles with NKC identifiers", "Wikipedia articles with NLA identifiers", "Wikipedia articles with NLI identifiers", "Wikipedia articles with NLK identifiers", "Wikipedia articles with NTA identifiers", "Wikipedia articles with RERO identifiers", "Wikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiers", "Wikipedia articles with SUDOC identifiers", "Wikipedia articles with Trove identifiers", "Wikipedia articles with VcBA identifiers", "Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiers", "Wikipedia articles with WORLDCATID identifiers", "Wikipedia articles with multiple identifiers"], "raw": "Ancient Indian philosopher\nFor other uses, see Chanakya (disambiguation).\n\n\nChanakyaChanakya, artistic depictionBorn375 BCE, Chanaka village in Golla region (Jain legends);[1] or in Takshashila (Buddhist legends)[2]Died283 BCE, Pataliputra, Maurya EmpireOccupationTeacher, Philosopher, Economist, Jurist, advisor of Chandragupta MauryaKnown\u00a0forProminent role in the foundation of the Maurya Empire & Arthashastra, Chanakya Niti\nChanakya (IAST: C\u0101\u1e47akya, pronunciation\u00a0(help\u00b7info)) was an ancient Indian teacher, philosopher, economist, jurist and royal advisor. He is traditionally identified as Kau\u1e6dilya or Vishnugupta, who authored the ancient Indian political treatise, the Arthashastra,[3] a text dated to roughly between the 4th century BCE and the 3rd century CE.[4] As such, he is considered the pioneer of the field of political science and economics in India, and his work is thought of as an important precursor to classical economics.[5][6][7][8] His works were lost near the end of the Gupta Empire in the 6th century CE and not rediscovered until the early 20th century.[6]\nChanakya assisted the first Mauryan emperor Chandragupta in his rise to power. He is widely credited for having played an important role in the establishment of the Maurya Empire. Chanakya served as the chief advisor to both emperors Chandragupta and his son Bindusara.\n\nContents\n\n1 Background\n\n1.1 Sources of information\n1.2 Identification with Kau\u1e6dilya or Vishnugupta\n\n\n2 Legends\n\n2.1 Buddhist version\n2.2 Jain version\n2.3 Kashmiri version\n2.4 Mudrarakshasa version\n\n\n3 Literary works\n4 Legacy\n5 In Popular Culture\n\n5.1 Plays\n5.2 Film and television\n5.3 Books and academia\n\n\n6 See also\n7 References\n\n7.1 Bibliography\n\n\n8 External links\n\n\nBackground\nSources of information\nThere is little documented historical information about Chanakya: most of what is known about him comes from semi-legendary accounts. Thomas Trautmann identifies four distinct accounts of the ancient Chanakya-Chandragupta katha (legend):[9]\n\n\n\nVersion of the legend\n\nExample texts\n\n\nBuddhist version\n\nMahavamsa and its commentary Vamsatthappakasini (Pali language)\n\n\nJain version\n\nParishishtaparvan by Hemachandra\n\n\nKashmiri version\n\nKathasaritsagara by Somadeva, Brihat-Katha-Manjari by Ksemendra\n\n\nVishakhadatta's version\n\nMudrarakshasa, a Sanskrit play by Vishakhadatta\n\nIn all the four versions, Chanakya feels insulted by the Nanda king, and vows to destroy him. After dethroning the Nanda, he installs Chandragupta as the new king.\n\nBuddhist version\nThe legend of Chanakya and Chandragupta is detailed in the Pali-language Buddhist chronicles of Sri Lanka. It is not mentioned in Dipavamsa, the oldest of these chronicles.[10] The earliest Buddhist source to mention the legend is Mahavamsa, which is generally dated between 5th and 6th centuries CE. Vamsatthappakasini (also known as Mahvamsa Tika), a commentary on Mahavamsa, provides some more details about the legend. Its author is unknown, and it is dated variously from 6th century CE to 13th century CE.[11] Some other texts provide additional details about the legend; for example, the Maha-Bodhi-Vamsa and the Atthakatha give the names of the nine Nanda kings said to have preceded Chandragupta.[10][12]\nJain version\nThe Chandragupta-Chanakya legend is mentioned in several commentaries of the Shvetambara canon. The most well-known version of the Jain legend is contained in the Sthaviravali-Charita or Parishishta-Parvan, written by the 12th-century writer Hemachandra.[1] Hemachandra's account is based on the Prakrit kathanaka literature (legends and anecdotes) composed between the late 1st century CE and mid-8th century CE. These legends are contained in the commentaries (churnis and tikas) on canonical texts such as Uttaradhyayana and Avashyaka Niryukti.[13]\nThomas Trautmann believes that the Jain version is older and more consistent than the Buddhist version of the legend.[13]\nKashmiri version\nBrihatkatha-Manjari by Kshemendra and Kathasaritsagara by Somadeva are two 11th-century Kashmiri Sanskrit collections of legends. Both are based on a now-lost Prakrit-language Brihatkatha-Sarit-Sagara. It was based on the now-lost Paishachi-language Brihatkatha by Gunadhya. The Chanakya-Chandragupta legend in these collections features another character, named Shakatala (IAST: \u015aaka\u1e6d\u0101la).[14]\nMudrarakshasa version\nMudrarakshasa (\"The signet ring of Rakshasa\") is a Sanskrit play by Vishakhadatta. Its date is uncertain, but it mentions the Huna, who invaded northern India during the Gupta period. Therefore, it could not have been composed before the Gupta era.[15] It is dated variously from the late 4th century[16] to the 8th century.[17] The Mudrarakshasa legend contains narratives not found in other versions of the Chanakya-Chandragupta legend. Because of this difference, Trautmann suggests that most of it is fictional or legendary, without any historical basis.[18]\nIdentification with Kau\u1e6dilya or Vishnugupta\nSee also: Arthashastra \u00a7\u00a0Authorship\nThe ancient Arthashastra has been traditionally attributed to Chanakya by a number of scholars. The Arthashastra identifies its author as Kau\u1e6dilya, a gotra or clan name, except for one verse that refers to him by the personal name of Vishnugupta.[19] Kau\u1e6dilya is presumably the name of the author's gotra (clan).[20]\nOne of the earliest Sanskrit literatures to identify Chanakya with Vishnugupta explicitly was the Panchatantra.[21][need quotation to verify]\nK. C. Ojha proposes that the traditional identification of Vishnugupta with Kau\u1e6dilya was caused by a confusion of the text's editor and its originator. He suggests that Vishnugupta was a redactor of the original work of Kau\u1e6dilya.[3] Thomas Burrow suggests that Chanakya and Kau\u1e6dilya may have been two different people.[22]\n\nLegends\n Dhana Nanda's empire, circa 323 BCE\nBuddhist version\nAccording to the Buddhist legend, the Nanda kings who preceded Chandragupta were robbers-turned-rulers.[10] Chanakya (IAST: C\u0101\u1e47akka in Mahavamsa) was a Brahmin from Takk\u0101sila (Takshashila). He was well-versed in three Vedas and politics. He had canine teeth, which were believed to be a mark of royalty. His mother feared that he would neglect her after becoming a king.[2] To pacify her, Chanakya broke his teeth.[23]\nChanakya was said to be ugly, accentuated by his broken teeth and crooked feet. One day, the king Dhana Nanda organized an alms-giving ceremony for Brahmins. Chanakya went to Pupphapura (Pushpapura) to attend this ceremony. Disgusted by his appearance, the king ordered him to be thrown out of the assembly. Chanakya broke his sacred thread in anger, and cursed the king. The king ordered his arrest, but Chanakya escaped in the disguise of an \u0100j\u012bvika. He befriended Dhananada's son Pabbata, and instigated him to seize the throne. With help of a signet ring given by the prince, Chanakya fled the palace through a secret door.[23]\nChanakya escaped to the Vinjha forest. There, he made 800 million gold coins (kahapanas), using a secret technique that allowed him to turn 1 coin into 8 coins. After hiding this money, he started searching for a person worthy of replacing Dhana Nanda.[23] One day, he saw a group of children playing: the young Chandragupta (called Chandagutta in Mahavamsa) played the role of a king, while other boys pretended to be vassals, ministers, or robbers. The \"robbers\" were brought before Chandragupta, who ordered their limbs to be cut off, but then miraculously re-attached them. Chandragupta had been born in a royal family, but was brought up by a hunter after his father was killed by an usurper, and the devatas caused his mother to abandon him. Astonished by the boy's miraculous powers, Chanakya paid 1000 gold coins to his foster-father, and took Chandragupta away, promising to teach him a trade.[24]\nChanakya had two potential successors to Dhana Nanda: Pabbata and Chandragupta. He gave each of them an amulet to be worn around the neck with a woolen thread. One day, he decided to test them. While Chandragupta was asleep, he asked Pabbata to remove Chandragupta's woolen thread without breaking it and without waking up Chandragupta. Pabbata failed to accomplish this task. Some time later, when Pabbata was sleeping, Chanakya challenged Chandragupta to complete the same task. Chandragupta retrieved the woolen thread by cutting off Pabbata's head. For the next seven years, Chanakya trained Chandragupta for royal duties. When Chandragupta became an adult, Chanakya dug up his hidden treasure of gold coins, and assembled an army.[24]\nThe army of Chanadragupta and Chanakya invaded Dhana Nanda's kingdom, but disbanded after facing a severe defeat. While wandering in disguise, the two men once listened to the conversation between a woman and her son. The child had eaten the middle of a cake, and thrown away the edges. The woman scolded him, saying that he was eating food like Chandragupta, who attacked the central part of the kingdom instead of conquering the border villages first. Chanakya and Chandragupta realized their mistake. They assembled a new army, and started conquering the border villages. Gradually, they advanced to the kingdom's capital Pataliputra (P\u0101\u1e6daliputta in Mahavamsa), where they killed the king Dhana Nanda. Chanakya ordered a fisherman to find the place where Dhana Nanda had hidden his treasure. As soon as the fishermen informed Chanakya about its location, Chanakya had him killed. Chanakya anointed Chandragupta as the new king, and tasked a man named Pa\u1e47iyatappa with eliminating rebels and robbers from the kingdom.[25]\nChanakya started mixing small doses of poison in the new king's food to make him immune to poisoning attempts by the enemies. Chandragupta, who was not aware of this, once shared the food with his pregnant queen, who was seven days away from delivery. Chanakya arrived just as the queen ate the poisoned morsel. Realizing that she was going to die, Chanakya decided to save the unborn child. He cut off the queen's head and cut open her belly with a sword to take out the foetus. Over the next seven days, he placed the foetus in the belly of a goat freshly killed each day. After seven days, Chandragupta's son was \"born\". He was named Bindusara, because his body was spotted with drops (bindu) of goat's blood.[25]\nThe earliest Buddhist legends do not mention Chanakya in their description of the Mauryan dynasty after this point.[24] Dhammapala's commentary on Theragatha, however, mentions a legend about Chanakya and a Brahmin named Subandhu. According to this account, Chanakya was afraid that the wise Subandhu would surpass him at Chandragupta's court. So, he got Chandragupta to imprison Subandhu, whose son Tekicchakani escaped and became a Buddhist monk.[26] The 16th-century Tibetan Buddhist author Taranatha mentions Chanakya as one of Bindusara's \"great lords\". According to him, Chanakya destroyed the nobles and kings of 16 towns and made Bindusara the master of all the territory between the eastern and the western seas (Arabian Sea and the Bay of Bengal).[27]\n\nJain version\nAccording to the Jain account, Chanakya was born to two lay Jains (shravaka) named Chanin and Chaneshvari. His birthplace was the Chanaka village in Golla vishaya (region).[1] The identity of \"Golla\" is not certain, but Hemachandra states that Chanakya was a Dramila, implying that he was a native of South India.[28]\nChanakya was born with a full set of teeth. According to the monks, this was a sign that he would become a king in the future. Chanin did not want his son to become haughty, so he broke Chanakya's teeth. The monks prophesied that the baby would go on to become a power behind the throne.[1] Chanakya grew up to be a learned shravaka, and married a Brahmin woman. Her relatives mocked her for being married to a poor man. This motivated Chanakya to visit Pataliputra, and seek donations from the king Nanda, who was famous for his generosity towards Brahmins. While waiting for the king at the royal court, Chanakya sat on the king's throne. A dasi (servant girl) courteously offered Chanakya the next seat, but Chanakya kept his kamandal (water pot) on it, while remaining seated on the throne. The servant offered him a choice of four more seats, but each time, he kept his various items on the seats, refusing to budge from the throne. Finally, the annoyed servant kicked him off the throne. Enraged, Chanakya vowed to uproot Nanda and his entire establishment, like \"a great wind uproots a tree\".[29]\nChanakya knew that he was prophesied to become a power behind the throne. So, he started searching for a person worthy of being a king. While wandering, he did a favour for the pregnant daughter of a village chief, on the condition that her child would belong to him. Chandragupta was born to this lady. When Chandragupta grew up, Chanakya came to his village and saw him playing \"king\" among a group of boys. To test him, Chanakya asked him for a donation. The boy told Chanakya to take the cows nearby, declaring that nobody would disobey his order. This display of power convinced Chanakya that Chandragupta was the one worthy of being a king.[1]\nChanakya took Chandragupta to conquer Pataliputra, the capital of Nanda. He assembled an army using the wealth he had acquired through alchemy (dhatuvada-visaradan). The army suffered a severe defeat, forcing Chanakya and Chandragupta to flee the battlefield. They reached a lake while being pursued by an enemy officer. Chanakya asked Chandragupta to jump into the lake, and disguised himself as a meditating ascetic. When the enemy soldier reached the lake, he asked the 'ascetic' if he had seen Chandragupta. Chanakya pointed at the lake. As the soldier removed his armour to jump into the lake, Chanakya took his sword and killed him. When Chandragupta came out of the water, Chanakya asked him, \"What went through your mind, when I disclosed your location to the enemy?\" Chandragupta replied that he trusted his master to make the best decision. This convinced Chanakya that Chandragupta would remain under his influence even after becoming the king. On another occasion, Chanakya similarly escaped the enemy by chasing away a washerman, and disguising himself as one. Once, he cut open the belly of a Brahmin who had just eaten food, and took out the food to feed a hungry Chandragupta.[30]\nOne day, Chanakya and Chandragupta overheard a woman scolding her son. The child had burnt his finger by putting it in the middle of a bowl of hot gruel. The woman told her son that by not starting from the cooler edges, he was being foolish like Chanakya, who attacked the capital before conquering the bordering regions. Chanakya realized his mistake, and made a new plan to defeat Nanda. He formed an alliance with Parvataka, the king of a mountain kingdom called Himavatkuta, offering him half of Nanda's kingdom.[30]\nAfter securing Parvataka's help, Chanakya and Chandragupta started besieging the towns other than Pataliputra. One particular town offered a strong resistance. Chanakya entered this town disguised as a Shaivite mendicant, and declared that the siege would end if the idols of the seven mothers were removed from the town's temple. As soon as the superstitious defenders removed the idols from the temple, Chanakya ordered his army to end the siege. When the defenders started celebrating their victory, Chanakya's army launched a surprise attack and captured the town.[30]\nGradually, Chanakya and Chandragupta subdued all the regions outside the capital. Finally, they captured Pataliputra and Chandragupta became the king. They allowed the king Nanda to go into exile, with all the goods he could take on a cart. As Nanda and his family were leaving the city on a cart, his daughter saw Chandragupta, and fell in love with the new king. She chose him as her husband by svayamvara tradition. As she was getting off the cart, 9 spokes of the cart's wheel broke. Interpreting this as an omen, Chanakya declared that Chandragupta's dynasty would last for 9 generations.[30]\nMeanwhile, Parvataka fell in love with one of Nanda's visha kanyas (poison girl). Chanakya approved the marriage, and Parvataka collapsed when he touched the girl during the wedding. Chanakya asked Chandragupta not to call a physician. Thus, Parvataka died and Chandragupta became the sole ruler of Nanda's territories.[31]\nChanakya then started consolidating the power by eliminating Nanda's loyalists, who had been harassing people in various parts of the kingdom. Chanakya learned about a weaver who would burn any part of his house infested with cockroaches. Chanakya assigned the responsibility of crushing the rebels to this weaver. Soon, the kingdom was free of insurgents. Chanakya also burned a village that had refused him food in the past. He filled the royal treasury by inviting rich merchants to his home, getting them drunk and gambling with a loaded dice.[31]\nOnce, the kingdom suffered a 12-year long famine. Two young Jain monks started eating from the king's plate, after making themselves invisible with a magic ointment. Chanakya sensed their presence by covering the palace floor with a powder, and tracing their footprints. At the next meal, he caught them by filling the dining room with thick smoke, which caused the monks' eyes to water, washing off the ointment. Chanakya complained about the young monks behavior to the head monk Acharya Susthita. The Acharya blamed people for not being charitable towards monks, so Chanakya started giving generous alms to the monks.[31]\nMeanwhile, Chandragupta had been patronizing the non-Jain monks. Chanakya decided to prove to him that these men were not worthy of his patronage. He covered the floor of the palace area near the women's rooms with a powder, and left the non-Jain monks there. Their footprints showed that they had sneaked up to the windows of the women's rooms to peep inside. The Jain monks, who were assessed using the same method, stayed away from the women's rooms. After seeing this, Chandragupta appointed the Jain monks as his spiritual counsellors.[32]\nChanakya used to mix small doses of poison in Chandragupta's food to make him immune to poisoning attempts. The king, unaware of this, once shared his food with Queen Durdhara. Chanakya entered the room at the instant she died. He cut open the dead queen's belly and took out the baby. The baby, who had been touched by a drop (\"bindu\") of the poison, was named Bindusara.[32]\nAfter Chandragupta abdicated the throne to become a Jain monk, Chanakya anointed Bindusara as the new king.[32] Chanakya asked Bindusara to appoint a man named Subandhu as one of his ministers. However, Subandhu wanted to become a higher minister and grew jealous of Chanakya. So, he told Bindusara that Chanakya was responsible for the death of his mother. Bindusara confirmed the allegations with the nurses, who told him that Chanakya had cut open the belly of his mother. And enraged Bindusara started hating Chanakya. As a result, Chanakya, who had grown very old by this time, retired and decided to starve himself to death. Meanwhile, Bindusara came to know about the detailed circumstances of his birth, and implored Chanakya to resume his ministerial duties. After failing to pacify Chanakya, the emperor ordered Subandhu to convince Chanakya to give up his suicide plan. Subandhu, while pretending to appease Chanakya, burned him to death. Subandhu then took possession of Chanakya's home. Chanakya had anticipated this, and before retiring, he had set up a cursed trap for Subandhu. He had left behind a chest with a hundred locks. Subandhu broke the locks, hoping to find precious jewels. He found a sweet-smelling perfume and immediately inhaled it. But then his eyes fell on a birch bark note with a curse written on it. The note declared that anybody who smelled this perfume will have to either become a monk or face death. Subandhu tested the perfume on another man, and then fed him luxurious food (something that the monks abstain from). The man died, and then Subandhu was forced to become a monk to avoid death.[33][34]\nAccording to another Jain text \u2013 the Rajavali-Katha \u2013 Chanakya accompanied Chandragupta to forest for retirement, once Bindusara became the king.[35]\n\nKashmiri version\nThe Kashmiri version of the legend goes like this: Vararuchi (identified with Katyayana), Indradatta and Vyadi were three disciples of the sage Varsha. Once, on behalf of their guru Varsha, they traveled to Ayodhya to seek a gurudakshina (guru's fee) from king Nanda. As they arrived to meet Nanda, the king died. Using his yogic powers, Indradatta entered Nanda's body, and granted Vararuchi's request for 10 million dinars (gold coins). The royal minister Shakatala realized what was happening, and had Indradatta's body burnt. But before he could take any action against the fake king (Indradatta in Nanda's body, also called Yogananda), the king had him arrested. Shakatala and his 100 sons were imprisoned, and were given food sufficient only for one person. Shakatala's 100 sons starved to death, so that their father could live to take revenge.[36]\nMeanwhile, the fake king appointed Vararuchi as his minister. As the king's character kept deteriorating, a disgusted Vararuchi retired to a forest as an ascetic. Shakatala was then restored as the minister, but kept planning his revenge. One day, Shakatala came across Chanakya, a Brahmin who was uprooting all the grass in his path, because one blade of the grass had pricked his foot. Shakatala realized that he could use a man so vengeful to destroy the fake king. He invited Chanakya to the king's assembly, promising him 100,000 gold coins for presiding over a ritual ceremony.[36]\nShakatala hosted Chanakya in his own house, and treated him with great respect. But the day Chanakya arrived at the king's court, Shakatala got another Brahmin named Subandhu to preside over the ceremony. Chanakya felt insulted, but Shakatala blamed the king for this dishonour. Chanakya then untied his topknot (sikha), and vowed not to re-tie it until the king was destroyed. The king ordered his arrest, but he escaped to Shakatala's house. There, using materials supplied by Shakatala, he performed a magic ritual which made the king sick. The king died of fever after 7 days.[37]\nShakatala then executed Hiranyagupta, the son of the fake king. He anointed Chandragupta, the son of the real king Nanda, as the new king (in Kshemendra's version, it is Chanakya who installs Chandragupta as the new king). Shakatala also appointed Chanakya as the royal priest (purohita). Having achieved his revenge, he then retired to the forest as an ascetic.[37]\n\nMudrarakshasa version\nAccording to the Mudrarakshasa version, the king Nanda once removed Chanakya from the \"first seat of the kingdom\" (this possibly refers to Chanakya's expulsion from the king's assembly). For this reason, Chanakya vowed not to tie his top knot (shikha) until the complete destruction of Nanda. Chanakya made a plan to dethrone Nanda, and replace him with Chandragupta, his son by a lesser queen. Chanakya engineered Chandragupta's alliance with another powerful king Parvateshvara (or Parvata), and the two rulers agreed to divide Nanda's territory after subjugating him. Their allied army included Bahlika, Kirata, Parasika, Kamboja, Shaka, and Yavana soldiers. The army invaded Pataliputra (Kusumapura) and defeated the Nandas.[38] Parvata is identified with King Porus by some scholars.[39]\nNanda's prime minister Rakshasa escaped Pataliputra, and continued resisting the invaders. He sent a vishakanya (poison girl) to assassinate Chandragupta. Chanakya had this girl assassinate Parvata instead, with the blame going to Rakshasa. However, Parvata's son Malayaketu learned the truth about his father's death, and defected to Rakshasa's camp. Chanakya's spy Bhagurayana accompanied Malayaketu, pretending to be his friend.[40]\nRakshasa continued to plot Chandragupta's death, but all his plans were foiled by Chanakya. For example, once Rakshasa arranged for assassins to be transported to Chandragupta's bedroom via a tunnel. Chanakya became aware of them by noticing a trail of ants carrying the leftovers of their food. He then arranged for the assassins to be burned to death.[41]\nMeanwhile, Parvata's brother Vairodhaka became the ruler of his kingdom. Chanakya convinced him that Rakshasa was responsible for killing his brother, and agreed to share half of Nanda's kingdom with him. Secretly, however, Chanakya hatched a plan to get Vairodhaka killed. He knew that the chief architect of Pataliputra was a Rakshasa loyalist. He asked this architect to build a triumphal arch for Chandragupta's procession to the royal palace. He arranged the procession to be held at midnight citing astrological reasons, but actually to ensure poor visibility. He then invited Vairodhaka to lead the procession on Chandragupta's elephant, and accompanied by Chandragupta's bodyguards. As expected, Rakshasa's loyalists arranged for the arch to fall on who they thought was Chandragupta. Vairodhaka was killed, and once again, the assassination was blamed on Rakshasa.[40]\nMalayaketu and Rakshasa then formed an alliance with five kings: Chiravarman of Kauluta (Kulu), Meghaksha of Parasika, Narasimha of Malaya, Pushkaraksha of Kashmira, and Sindhusena of Saindhava. This allied army also included soldiers from Chedi, Gandhara, Hunas, Khasa, Magadha, Shaka, and Yavana territories.[41]\nIn Pataliputra, Chanakya's agent informed him that three Rakshasa loyalists remained in the capital: the Jain monk Jiva-siddhi, the scribe Shakata-dasa and the jewelers' guild chief Chandana-dasa. Of these, Jiva-siddhi was actually a spy of Chanakya, unknown to his other spies. Chandana-dasa sheltered Rakshasa's wife, who once unknowingly dropped her husband's signet-ring (mudra). Chanakya's agent got hold of this signet-ring, and brought it to Chanakya. Using this signet ring, Chanakya sent a letter to Malayaketu warning him that his allies were treacherous. Chanakya also asked some of Chandragupta's princes to fake defection to Malayaketu's camp. In addition, Chanakya ordered Shakata-dasa's murder, but had him 'rescued' by Siddharthaka, a spy pretending to be an agent of Chandana-dasa. Chanakya's spy then took Shakata-dasa to Rakshasa.[41]\nWhen Shakata-dasa and his 'rescuer' Siddharthaka reached Rakshasa, Siddharthaka presented him the signet-ring, claiming to have found it at Chandana-dasa's home. As a reward, Rakshasa gave him some jewels that Malayaketu had gifted him. Sometime after this, another of Chanakya's agents, disguised as a jeweler, sold Parvata's jewels to Rakshasa.[42]\nSometime later, Rakshasa sent his spies disguised as musicians to Chandragupta's court. But Chanakya knew all about Rakshasa's plans thanks to his spies. In front of Rakshasa's spies, Chanakya and Chandragupta feigned an angry argument. Chandragupta pretended to dismiss Chanakya, and declared that Rakshasa would make a better minister. Meanwhile, Malayaketu had a conversation with Chanakya's spy Bhagurayana while approaching Rakshasa's house. Bhagurayana made Malayaketu distrustful of Rakshasa, by saying that Rakshasa hated only Chanakya, and would be willing to serve Nanda's son Chandragupta. Shortly after this, a messenger came to Rakshasa's house, and informed him that Chandragupta had dismissed Chanakya while praising him. This convinced Malayaketu that Rakashasa could not be trusted.[42]\nMalayaketu then decided to invade Pataliputra without Rakshasa by his side. He consulted the Jain monk Jiva-siddhi to decide an auspicious time for beginning the march. Jiva-siddhi, a spy of Chanakya, told him that he could start immediately.[42] Jiva-siddhi also convinced him that Rakshasa was responsible for his father's death, but Bhagurayana persuaded him not to harm Rakshasa. Shortly after, Chanakya's spy Siddharthaka pretended to get caught with a fake letter addressed to Chandragupta by Rakshasa. Wearing the jewels given by Rakshasa, he pretended to be an agent of Rakshasa. The letter, sealed with Rakshasa's signet-ring, informed Chandragupta that Rakshasa only wished to replace Chanakya as the prime minister. It also stated that five of Malayaketu's allies were willing to defect to Chandragupta in return for land and wealth. An angry Malayaketu summoned Rakshasa, who arrived wearing Parvata's jewels that Chanakya's agent had sold him. When Malayaketu saw Rakshasa wearing his father's jewels, he was convinced that there was indeed a treacherous plan against him. He executed his five allies in a brutal manner.[43]\nThe rest of Malayaketu's allies deserted him, disgusted at his treatment of the five slayed allies. Rakshasa managed to escape, tracked by Chanakya's spies. One of Chanakya's spies, disguised as a friend of Chandana-dasa, got in touch with him. He told Rakshasa that Chandana-dasa was about to be executed for refusing to divulge the location of Rakshasa's family. On hearing this, Rakshasa rushed to Pataliputra to surrender and save the life of his loyal friend Chandana-dasa. When he reached Pataliputra, Chanakya, pleased with his loyalty to Chandana-dasa, offered him clemency. Rakshasa pledged allegiance to Chandragupta and agreed to be his prime minister, in return for release of Chandana-dasa and a pardon for Malayaketu. Chanakya then bound his top knot, having achieved his objective, and retired.[43]\n\nLiterary works\nTwo books are attributed to Chanakya: Arthashastra,[44] and Chanakya Niti, also known as Chanakya Neeti-shastra.[45] The Arthashastra was discovered in 1905 by librarian Rudrapatna Shamasastry in an uncatalogued group of ancient palm-leaf manuscripts donated by an unknown pandit to the Oriental Research Institute Mysore.[46]\nThe Arthashastra discusses monetary and fiscal policies, welfare, international relations, and war strategies in detail. The text also outlines the duties of a ruler.[47][unreliable source?] Some scholars believe that Arthashastra is actually a compilation of a number of earlier texts written by various authors, and Chanakya might have been one of these authors (see above).[9]\nChanakya Niti is a collection of aphorisms, said to be selected by Chanakya from the various shastras.[45]\nLegacy\n\nArthashastra is serious manual on statecraft, on how to run a state, informed by a higher purpose, clear and precise in its prescriptions, the result of practical experience of running a state. It is not just a normative text but a realist description of the art of running a state.\n- Shiv Shankar Menon, National Security Advisor[48]\n\n\nChanakya is regarded as a great thinker and diplomat in India. Many Indian nationalists regard him as one of the earliest people who envisioned a united India spanning the entire subcontinent. India's former National Security Advisor Shiv Shankar Menon praised Chanakya's Arthashastra for its precise and timeless descriptions of power. Furthermore, he recommended reading of the book for broadening the vision on strategic issues.[48]\nThe diplomatic enclave in New Delhi is named Chanakyapuri in honour of Chanakya. Institutes named after him include Training Ship Chanakya, Chanakya National Law University and Chanakya Institute of Public Leadership. Chanakya circle in Mysore has been named after him.[49][self-published source?]\n\nIn Popular Culture\nPlays\nSeveral modern adaptations of the legend of Chanakya narrate his story in a semi-fictional form, extending these legends. In Chandragupta (1911), a play by Dwijendralal Ray, the Nanda king exiles his half-brother Chandragupta, who joins the army of Alexander the Great. Later, with help from Chanakya and Katyayan (the former Prime Minister of Magadha), Chandragupta defeats Nanda, who is put to death by Chanakya.[50]\n\nFilm and television\nThe story of Chanakya and Chandragupta was portrayed in the 1977 Telugu film entitled Chanakya Chandragupta. Akkineni Nageswara Rao played the role of Chanakya, while N. T. Rama Rao portrayed as Chandragupta.[51]\nThe 1991 TV series Chanakya is an archetypal account of the life and times of Chanakya, based on the Mudrarakshasa. The titular role of the same name was portrayed by Chandraprakash Dwivedi\nChandragupta Maurya, a 2011 TV series on NDTV Imagine is a biographical series on the life of Chandragupta Maurya and Chanakya, and is produced by Sagar Arts. Manish Wadhwa portrays the character of Chanakya in this series.\nThe 2015 Colors TV drama, Chakravartin Ashoka Samrat, features Chanakya during the reign of Chandragupta's son, Bindusara.\nChanakya was played by Chetan Pandit and Tarun Khanna, in the historical-drama television series Porus in 2017\u20132018.\nChanakya was played by Tarun Khanna, in the historical drama TV series Chandragupta Maurya in 2018\u20132019.\nBooks and academia\nAn English-language book titled Chanakya on Management contains 216 sutras on raja-neeti, each of which has been translated and commented upon.\nA book written by Ratan Lal Basu and Rajkumar Sen deals with the economic concepts mentioned in Arthashastra and their relevance for the modern world.[52]\nChanakya (2001) by B. K. Chaturvedi[53]\nIn 2009, many eminent experts discussed the various aspects of Kau\u1e6dilya's thought in an International Conference held at the Oriental Research Institute in Mysore (India) to celebrate the centenary of discovery of the manuscript of the Arthashastra by R. Shamasastry. Most of the papers presented in the Conference have been compiled in an edited volume by Raj Kumar Sen and Ratan Lal Basu.[54][55]\nChanakya's Chant by Ashwin Sanghi is a fictional account of Chanakya's life as a political strategist in ancient India. The novel relates two parallel stories, the first of Chanakya and his machinations to bring Chandragupta Maurya to the throne of Magadha; the second, that of a modern-day character called Gangasagar Mishra who makes it his ambition to position a slum child as Prime Minister of India.\nThe Emperor's Riddles by Satyarth Nayak features popular episodes from Chanakya's life.\nKau\u1e6dilya's role in the formation of the Maurya Empire is the essence of a historical/spiritual novel Courtesan and the Sadhu by Mysore N. Prakash.[56]\nChanakya's contribution to the cultural heritage of Bharat (in Kannada) by Shatavadhani Ganesh with the title Bharatada Samskrutige Chanakyana Kodugegalu.[57]\nPavan Choudary (2 February 2009). Chanakya's Political Wisdom. Wisdom Village Publications Division. ISBN\u00a0978-81-906555-0-7., a political commentary on Chanakya\nSihag, Balbir Singh (2014), Kautilya: The True Founder of Economics, Vitasta Publishing Pvt.Ltd, ISBN\u00a0978-81-925354-9-4\nRadhakrishnan Pillai has written a number of books related to Chanakya \u2014 \"Chanakya in the Classroom: Life Lessons for Students\",[58] \"Chanakya Neeti: Strategies for Success\", \"Chanakya in You\", \"Chanakya and the Art of War\", \"Corporate Chanakya\",[59] \"Corporate Chanakya on Management\" and \"Corporate Chanakya on Leadership\".[60]\nSee also\nRajamandala\nReferences\n\n\n^ a b c d e Trautmann 1971, p.\u00a021.\n\n^ a b Trautmann 1971, p.\u00a012.\n\n^ a b Mabbett, I. W. (1964). \"The Date of the Artha\u015b\u0101stra\". Journal of the American Oriental Society. American Oriental Society. 84 (2): 162\u2013169. doi:10.2307/597102. ISSN\u00a00003-0279. JSTOR\u00a0597102.\n\n^ Transaction and Hierarchy. Routledge. p.\u00a056. ISBN\u00a01351393960.\n\n^ L. K. Jha, K. N. Jha (1998). \"Chanakya: the pioneer economist of the world\", International Journal of Social Economics 25 (2\u20134), p. 267\u2013282.\n\n^ a b Waldauer, C., Zahka, W.J. and Pal, S. 1996. Kau\u1e6dilya's Arthashastra: A neglected precursor to classical economics. Indian Economic Review, Vol. XXXI, No. 1, pp. 101\u2013108.\n\n^ Tisdell, C. 2003. A Western perspective of Kau\u1e6dilya's Arthashastra: does it provide a basis for economic science? Economic Theory, Applications and Issues Working Paper No. 18. Brisbane: School of Economics, The University of Queensland.\n\n^ Sihag, B.S. 2007. Kau\u1e6dilya on institutions, governance, knowledge, ethics and prosperity. Humanomics 23 (1): 5\u201328.\n\n^ a b Namita Sanjay Sugandhi (2008). Between the Patterns of History: Rethinking Mauryan Imperial Interaction in the Southern Deccan. ProQuest. pp.\u00a088\u201389. ISBN\u00a0978-0-549-74441-2. Retrieved 6 June 2012.\n\n^ a b c Trautmann 1971, p.\u00a011.\n\n^ Trautmann 1971, p.\u00a016.\n\n^ Trautmann 1971, pp.\u00a018.\n\n^ a b Trautmann 1971, p.\u00a029.\n\n^ Trautmann 1971, p.\u00a031\u201333.\n\n^ Trautmann 1971, pp.\u00a041\u201343.\n\n^ Varadpande 2005, p.\u00a0223.\n\n^ Upinder Singh 2016, p.\u00a030.\n\n^ Trautmann 1971, p.\u00a043.\n\n^ Trautmann 1971, p.\u00a05:\"the very last verse of the work... is the unique instance of the personal name Vishnugupta rather than the gotra name Kautilya in the Arthashastra.\"\n\n^ Trautmann 1971, p.\u00a010:\"while in his character as author of an Arthashastra he is generally referred to by his gotra name, Kautilya.\"\n\n^ Mabbett 1964: \"References to the work in other Sanskrit literature attribute it variously to Vishnugupta, Chanakya and Kautilya. The same individual is meant in each case. The Panchatantra explicitly identifies Chanakya with Vishnugupta.\"\n\n^ Trautmann 1971, p.\u00a067:\"T. Burrow (\"C\u0101\u1e47akya and Kau\u1e6dalya\", Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute 48\u201349, 1968, p. 17 ff.) has now shown that C\u0101\u1e47akya is also a gotra name, which in conjunction with other evidence makes it clear that we are dealing with two distinct persons, the minister C\u0101\u1e47akya of legend and Kau\u1e6dilya the compiler of the Arthashastra. Furthermore, this throws the balance of evidence in favor of the view that the second name was originally spelt Kau\u1e6dalya, and that after the compiler of the Arth came to be identified with the Mauryan minister, it was altered to Kau\u1e6dilya (as it appears in \u0100rya\u015b\u016bra, Vi\u015b\u0101khadatta and B\u0101na) for the sake of the pun. We must then assume that the later spelling subsequently replaced the earlier in the gotra lists and elsewhere.'\"\n\n^ a b c Trautmann 1971, p.\u00a013.\n\n^ a b c Trautmann 1971, p.\u00a014.\n\n^ a b Trautmann 1971, p.\u00a015.\n\n^ Trautmann 1971, p.\u00a028.\n\n^ Upinder Singh 2016, p.\u00a0331.\n\n^ Kallidaikurichi Aiyah Nilakanta Sastri (1988). Age of the Nandas and Mauryas. Motilal Banarsidass. p.\u00a0148. ISBN\u00a0978-81-208-0466-1.\n\n^ Trautmann 1971, p.\u00a022.\n\n^ a b c d Trautmann 1971, p.\u00a023.\n\n^ a b c Trautmann 1971, p.\u00a024.\n\n^ a b c Trautmann 1971, p.\u00a025.\n\n^ Motilal Banarsidass (1993). \"The Minister C\u0101\u1e47akya, from the Pari\u015bi\u1e63taparvan of Hemacandra\".  In Phyllis Granoff (ed.). The Clever Adulteress and Other Stories: A Treasury of Jaina Literature. Translated by Rosalind Lefeber. pp.\u00a0204\u2013206.\n\n^ Hemachandra (1891). Sthavir\u0302aval\u0302i charita, or, Pari\u015bishtaparvan. Translated by Hermann Jacobi. Calcutta: Asiatic Society. pp.\u00a067\u201368.\n\n^ Rice 1889, p.\u00a09.\n\n^ a b Trautmann 1971, p.\u00a031.\n\n^ a b Trautmann 1971, p.\u00a032.\n\n^ Trautmann 1971, pp.\u00a036\u201337.\n\n^ Varadpande 2005, pp.\u00a0227\u2013230.\n\n^ a b Trautmann 1971, p.\u00a037.\n\n^ a b c Trautmann 1971, p.\u00a038.\n\n^ a b c Trautmann 1971, p.\u00a039.\n\n^ a b Trautmann 1971, p.\u00a040.\n\n^ Kautilya's Arthashastra (PDF). Translated by Shamasastry, R. 1905. Retrieved 23 August 2020.CS1 maint: others (link)\n\n^ a b Sri Chanakya Niti-shastra; the Political Ethics of Chanakya Pandit Hardcover. Translated by Miles Davis and V. Badarayana Murthy. Ram Kumar Press. 1981. Archived from the original on 16 July 2014. Retrieved 15 August 2014.CS1 maint: others (link)\n\n^ Srinivasaraju, Sugata (27 July 2009). \"Year of the Guru\". Outlook India. Retrieved 17 March 2018.\n\n^ Paul Halsall. Indian History Sourcebook: Kautilya: from the Arthashastra c. 250 BC Retrieved 19 June 2012\n\n^ a b \"India needs to develop its own doctrine for strategic autonomy: NSA\". The Economic Times. NEW DELHI. Press Trust of India. 18 October 2012. Retrieved 18 October 2012.\n\n^ Yelegaonkar, Dr Shrikant. Chanakya's Views on Administration. Lulu.com. p.\u00a08. ISBN\u00a09781329082809.\n\n^ Ray, Dwijendralal (1969). \"Bhumika: Aitihasikata\" [Preface: Historic References].  In Bandyopadhyay, Sukumar (ed.). Dwijendralaler Chandragupta [Chandragupta by Dwindralal] (in Bengali) (4th\u00a0ed.). Kolkata: Modern Book Agency. pp.\u00a0Preface\u201310\u201314.\n\n^ Chanakya Chandragupta (1977), retrieved 24 May 2017\n\n^ Ratan Lal Basu & Rajkumar Sen: Ancient Indian Economic Thought, Relevance for Today, ISBN\u00a081-316-0125-0, Rawat Publications, New Delhi, 2008\n\n^ B. K. Chaturvedi (2001). Chanakya. Diamond Pocket Books. ISBN\u00a0978-81-7182-143-3. Retrieved 6 June 2012.\n\n^ Raj Kumar Sen & Ratan Lal Basu (eds): Economics in Arthashastra, ISBN\u00a081-7629-819-0, Deep& Deep Publications Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi, 2006\n\n^ Srinivasaraju, Sugata (27 July 2009). \"Year of the Guru\". Outlook India. Archived from the original on 12 October 2012. Retrieved 8 March 2012.\n\n^ The Courtesan and the Sadhu, A Novel about Maya, Dharma, and God, October 2008, Dharma Vision, ISBN\u00a0978-0-9818237-0-6, Library of Congress Control Number: 2008934274\n\n^ \"Bharatiya Samskrutige Chanakyana Kodugegalu Part 1\u00a0\u2013 Shatavadhani Dr.R.Ganesh\u00a0\u2014 Spiritual Bangalore\". spiritualbangalore.com. Archived from the original on 2 March 2014.\n\n^ \"Chanakya in the Classroom: Life Lessons for Students\". Rupa Publications. Retrieved 6 February 2021.\n\n^ Sethi, Vinay (December 2015). \"Corporate Citizen\". corporatecitizen.in. Retrieved 6 February 2021.\n\n^ \"Books - Radhakrishnan Pillai\". www.crossword.in. Retrieved 6 February 2021.\n\n\nBibliography\nMookerji, Radha Kumud (1988) [first published in 1966], Chandragupta Maurya and his times (4th\u00a0ed.), Motilal Banarsidass, ISBN\u00a081-208-0433-3\nRice, B. Lewis (1889), Epigraphia Carnatica, II: Inscriptions and Sravana Belgola, Bangalore: Mysore Government Central Press\nSingh, Upinder (2016), A History of Ancient and Early Medieval India: From the Stone Age to the 12th Century, Pearson Education, ISBN\u00a0978-93-325-6996-6\nTrautmann, Thomas R. (1971), Kau\u1e6dilya and the Artha\u015b\u0101stra: a statistical investigation of the authorship and evolution of the text, Brill\nVaradpande, Manohar Laxman (2005), History of Indian Theatre, Abhinav, ISBN\u00a0978-81-7017-430-1\nExternal links\n\n\n\nLook up Chanakya in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.\n\n\n\n\nWikiquote has quotations related to: Chanakya\n\nKautilya Arthashastra English translation by R. Shamasastry 1956 (revised edition with IAST diacritics and interwoven glossary)\nChanakya Nitishastra: English translation by Miles Davis.\nvteIndian philosophyTopics\nAtheism\nAtomism\nIdealism\nLogic\nMonotheism\nVedic philosophy\n\u0100stika\nHindu: Samkhya\nNyaya\nVaisheshika\nYoga\nM\u012bm\u0101\u1e43s\u0101\nVedanta\nAcintya bheda abheda\nAdvaita\nBhedabheda\nDvaita\nDvaitadvaita\nShuddhadvaita\nVishishtadvaita\nShaiva\nPratyabhij\u00f1a\nPashupata Shaivism\nShaiva Siddhanta\nN\u0101stika\n\u0100j\u012bvika\nAj\u00f1ana\nC\u0101rv\u0101ka\nJain\nAnekantavada\nSy\u0101dv\u0101da\nBuddhist philosophy and Early Buddhist schools\n\u015a\u016bnyat\u0101\nMadhyamaka\nYogacara\nSautr\u0101ntika\nSvatantrika\nTexts\nAbhinavabharati\nArthashastra\nBhagavad Gita\nBhagavata Purana\nBrahma Sutra\nBuddhist texts\nDharmashastra\nHindu texts\nJain Agamas\nKamasutra\nMimamsa Sutras\nAll 108 texts\nPrincipal\nNy\u0101ya S\u016btras\nNyayakusumanjali\nPanchadasi\nSamkhyapravachana Sutra\nSangam texts\nShiva Sutras\nTarka-Sangraha\nTattvacint\u0101ma\u1e47i\nTirukku\u1e5fa\u1e37\nUpanishads\nMinor\nVai\u015be\u1e63ika S\u016btra\nVedangas\nVedas\nYoga Sutras of Patanjali\nYoga Vasistha\nMore...\nPhilosophers\nAdi Shankara\nValluvar\nAvatsara\nUddalaka Aruni\nGautama Buddha\nY\u0101j\u00f1avalkya\nGargi Vachaknavi\nBuddhaghosa\nPata\u00f1jali\nKanada\nKapila\nBrihadratha Ikshvaku\nJaimini\nVyasa\nChanakya\nDharmakirti\nAkshapada Gotama\nNagarjuna\nPadmasambhava\nVasubandhu\nGaudapada\nRamana Maharshi\nVivekananda\nDayananda Saraswati\nRamanuja\nVedanta Desika\nRaikva\nSadananda\nSakayanya\nSatyakama Jabala\nMadhvacharya\nMahavira\nGuru Nanak\nMore...\nConcepts\nAbhava\nAbhasavada\nAbheda\nAdarsana\nAdrishta\nAdvaita\nAham\nAhimsa\nAishvarya\nAkrodha\nAksara\nAnatta\nAnanta\nAnavastha\nAnupalabdhi\nApauru\u1e63hey\u0101\nArtha\nAsiddhatva\nAsatkalpa\n\u0100tman\nAvyakta\nBhrama\nBrahman\nBrahmi sthiti\nBhuman\nBhumika\nCatu\u1e63ko\u1e6di\nChaitanya\nChidabhasa\nCittabhumi\nD\u0101na\nDevatas\nDharma\nDhi\nDravya\nDhrti\nEkagrata\nGu\u1e47a\nGuru Vandana\nHit\u0101\nIdam\nIkshana\nIshvaratva\nJivatva\nKama\nKarma\nKasaya\nKshetrajna\nLakshana\nMatsya Nyaya\nMithyatva\nMok\u1e63a\nNididhyasana\nNirv\u0101\u1e47a\nNiyama\nPad\u0101rtha\nParamatman\nParamananda\nParameshashakti\nParinama-vada\nPradhana\nPrajna\nPrak\u1e5bti\nPratibimbavada\nPrat\u012btyasamutp\u0101da\nPuru\u1e63a\nR\u0101jama\u1e47\u1e0dala\n\u1e5ata\nSakshi\nSamadhi\nSa\u1e43s\u0101ra\nSankalpa\nSatya\nSatkaryavada\nShabda Brahman\nSpho\u1e6da\nSthiti\n\u015a\u016bnyat\u0101\nSutram\nSv\u0101tantrya\nIccha-mrityu\nSy\u0101dv\u0101da\nTaijasa\nTajjalan\nTanmatra\nTy\u0101ga\nUparati\nUpekkh\u0101\nUtsaha\nVivartavada\nViraj\nYamas\nYoga\nMore...\n\nvteSocial and political philosophyAncientphilosophers\nAristotle\nChanakya\nCicero\nConfucius\nHan Fei\nLactantius\nLaozi\nMencius\nMozi\nOrigen\nPlato\nPolybius\nShang\nSocrates\nSun Tzu\nTertullian\nThucydides\nValluvar\nXenophon\nXunzi\nMedievalphilosophers\nAlpharabius\nAugustine\nAverroes\nBaldus\nBartolus\nBruni\nDante\nGelasius\nal-Ghazali\nGiles\nHostiensis\nIbn Khaldun\nJohn of Paris\nJohn of Salisbury\nLatini\nMaimonides\nMarsilius\nNizam al-Mulk\nPhotios\nThomas Aquinas\nWang\nWilliam of Ockham\nEarly modernphilosophers\nAmmirato\nBeza\nBodin\nBossuet\nBotero\nBuchanan\nCalvin\nCumberland\nDuplessis-Mornay\nErasmus\nFilmer\nGrotius\nGuicciardini\nHarrington\nHayashi\nHobbes\nHotman\nHuang\nLeibniz\nLocke\nLuther\nMachiavelli\nMalebranche\nMariana\nMilton\nMontaigne\nMore\nM\u00fcntzer\nNaud\u00e9\nPufendorf\nRohan\nSansovino\nSidney\nSpinoza\nSu\u00e1rez\n18th\u201319th-centuryphilosophers\nBakunin\nBentham\nBonald\nBosanquet\nBurke\nComte\nConstant\nCort\u00e9s\nEmerson\nEngels\nFichte\nFourier\nFranklin\nGodwin\nHamann\nHegel\nHerder\nHume\nJefferson\nJusti\nKant\npolitical philosophy\nKierkegaard\nLe Bon\nLe Play\nMadison\nMaistre\nMarx\nMazzini\nMill\nMontesquieu\nM\u00f6ser\nNietzsche\nNovalis\nPaine\nRenan\nRousseau\nRoyce\nSade\nSchiller\nSmith\nSpencer\nSpedalieri\nStirner\nTaine\nThoreau\nTocqueville\nVico\nVivekananda\nVoltaire\n20th\u201321st-centuryphilosophers\nAdorno\nAmbedkar\nArendt\nAurobindo\nAron\nAzurmendi\nBadiou\nBaudrillard\nBauman\nBenoist\nBerlin\nBernstein\nButler\nCamus\nChomsky\nDe Beauvoir\nDebord\nDu Bois\nDurkheim\nDworkin\nFoucault\nGandhi\nGauthier\nGehlen\nGentile\nGramsci\nHabermas\nHayek\nHeidegger\nIrigaray\nKautsky\nKirk\nKropotkin\nLaclau\nLenin\nLuxemburg\nManent\nMansfield\nMao\nMarcuse\nMaritain\nMichels\nMises\nMou\nMouffe\nNegri\nNiebuhr\nNozick\nNurs\u00ee\nOakeshott\nOrtega\nPareto\nPettit\nPlamenatz\nPolanyi\nPopper\nQutb\nRadhakrishnan\nRand\nRawls\nRothbard\nRussell\nSantayana\nSartre\nScanlon\nSchmitt\nScruton\nSearle\nShariati\nSimmel\nSimonovi\u0107\nSkinner\nSombart\nSorel\nSpann\nSpirito\nStrauss\nSun\nTaylor\nWalzer\nWeber\n\u017di\u017eek\nSocial theories\nAnarchism\nAuthoritarianism\nCollectivism\nCommunism\nCommunitarianism\nConflict theories\nConfucianism\nConsensus theory\nConservatism\nContractualism\nCosmopolitanism\nCulturalism\nFascism\nFeminist political theory\nGandhism\nHindu nationalism (Hindutva)\nIndividualism\nIslam\nIslamism\nLegalism\nLiberalism\nLibertarianism\nMohism\nNational liberalism\nRepublicanism\nSocial constructionism\nSocial constructivism\nSocial Darwinism\nSocial determinism\nSocialism\nUtilitarianism\nRelated articles\nJurisprudence\nPhilosophy and economics\nPhilosophy of education\nPhilosophy of history\nPhilosophy of love\nPhilosophy of sex\nPhilosophy of social science\nPolitical ethics\nSocial epistemology\nIndex\n\nCategory\n\nAuthority control \nBIBSYS: 90707231\nBNE: XX1397588\nBNF: cb12028321k (data)\nCiNii: DA00533228\nGND: 118721348\nISNI: 0000 0000 8855 4120, 0000 0003 8742 9442\nLCCN: n81112109\nNDL: 00445294\nNKC: xx0002375\nNLA: 35262062\nNLI: 000367163\nNLK: KAC201313877\nNTA: 072245980, 07321731X\nRERO: 02-A000097446\nSELIBR: 193087\nSUDOC: 028450574, 116485051\nTrove: 887349\nVcBA: 495/17551\nVIAF: 280385592\n WorldCat Identities: lccn-n81112109\n\n\n\n\n"}