{"name": "Samuel Guthrie (physician)", "content": "Samuel Guthrie (1782\u20131848) was an American physician from Hounsfield, New York.  He invented a form of percussion powder and also the punch lock for igniting it, which made the flintlock musket obsolete.  He discovered chloroform independently in 1831.\n Samuel Guthrie was a 19th-century physician and chemist who discovered the anaesthetic chloroform (trichloromethane) in 1831, by distilling chloride of lime with alcohol in a copper barrel, using it as a mild anesthetic in amputation surgeries. The same chemical compound was discovered independently by a French scientist, Eug\u00e8ne Soubeiran, in October 1831, and by the German chemist Justus von Liebig in November 1831, but Guthrie wrote of his findings in the summer of the same year, so he is generally acknowledged as the discoverer.\n At the age of 22, Samuel Guthrie Jr. married Sybil Sexton, who was originally from Connecticut.  They traveled by way of horse and buggy to the nearby village of Smyrna to be married.\n During the winter of 1810 to 1811, Guthrie studied at the College of Physicians and Surgeons of New York (which is now Columbia University.) In January 1815, he listened to lectures at the University of Pennsylvania.  These courses constituted his entire formal education.\n In 1817, Samuel Guthrie Jr. moved to Sackets Harbor, New York, Jefferson County, in northern New York where he opened up practice as a rural doctor.\n In addition to his medical practice, Dr. Guthrie was a successful businessman, best known in his time for manufacturing chloric ether, vinegar, and priming powder for firearms which made flintlock muskets obsolete. He also invented a process for converting potato starch into molasses and he distilled an alcohol that was reputed to be of unequaled quality in the Jefferson County.\n \n This biographical article related to a physician in the United States is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. This article about a United States engineer, inventor or industrial designer is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. This firearms-related article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it. ", "tags": ["1782 births", "1848 deaths", "19th-century American physicians", "People from Hounsfield, New York", "People from Sackets Harbor, New York", "Engineers from New York (state)", "American physician stubs", "American engineer stubs", "Firearms stubs", "Wikipedia articles with ISNI identifiers", "Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiers", "Wikipedia articles with NKC identifiers", "Wikipedia articles with SNAC-ID identifiers", "Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiers", "Wikipedia articles with WORLDCATID identifiers", "All stub articles"], "raw": " In 1912, Howard E. Bishop (front row, far left) was selected to serve as Robert Packer Hospital superintendent. Pictured with hospital staff, from left to right, (first row) Dr. Silas Molyneux, Dr. Donald Guthrie, and X-ray operator and photographer A.T. Weaver; (second row) Dr. George W. Hawk, Dr. Rufus Reeves, Dr. Walter E. Lundblad, Dr. Phillip Schwartz, and Dr. C. N. Haines; (third row) nurses Margaret Ohlman, Cleo Hollopeter, Julia Coyle, and Belle Spencer.\nSamuel Guthrie (1782\u20131848) was an American physician from Hounsfield, New York.  He invented a form of percussion powder and also the punch lock for igniting it, which made the flintlock musket obsolete.  He discovered chloroform independently in 1831.\nSamuel Guthrie was a 19th-century physician and chemist who discovered the anaesthetic chloroform (trichloromethane) in 1831, by distilling chloride of lime with alcohol in a copper barrel, using it as a mild anesthetic in amputation surgeries. The same chemical compound was discovered independently by a French scientist, Eug\u00e8ne Soubeiran, in October 1831, and by the German chemist Justus von Liebig in November 1831, but Guthrie wrote of his findings in the summer of the same year, so he is generally acknowledged as the discoverer.\nAt the age of 22, Samuel Guthrie Jr. married Sybil Sexton, who was originally from Connecticut.  They traveled by way of horse and buggy to the nearby village of Smyrna to be married.\nDuring the winter of 1810 to 1811, Guthrie studied at the College of Physicians and Surgeons of New York (which is now Columbia University.) In January 1815, he listened to lectures at the University of Pennsylvania.  These courses constituted his entire formal education.\nIn 1817, Samuel Guthrie Jr. moved to Sackets Harbor, New York, Jefferson County, in northern New York where he opened up practice as a rural doctor.\nIn addition to his medical practice, Dr. Guthrie was a successful businessman, best known in his time for manufacturing chloric ether, vinegar, and priming powder for firearms which made flintlock muskets obsolete. He also invented a process for converting potato starch into molasses and he distilled an alcohol that was reputed to be of unequaled quality in the Jefferson County.\n\nLegacy[edit]\nGuthrie Ambulatory Health Care Clinic, opened in January 1991, and in May was dedicated to the memory of Samuel Guthrie.\nSee also[edit]\nDr. Samuel Guthrie House\nExternal links[edit]\nPhoto of Guthrie's home\nVictor Robinson \"Victory Over Pain - A History of Anesthesia\" (p. 175 - 190) \nAuthority control \nISNI: 0000 0000 5560 9789\nLCCN: n85800397\nNKC: nlk20000090891\nSNAC: w6cz5d16\nVIAF: 23606231\n WorldCat Identities: lccn-n85800397\n\n\n\n This biographical article related to a physician in the United States is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.vte\nThis article about a United States engineer, inventor or industrial designer is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.vte\nThis firearms-related article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.vte\n\n\n\n"}