{"name": 0.00041657987919183504, "content": "\n Henry Jaynes Fonda (May 16, 1905 \u2013 August 12, 1982) was an American film and stage actor[1] who had a career that spanned five decades in Hollywood. Fonda cultivated a strong, appealing screen image in several films now considered to be classics, earning one Academy Award for Best Actor on two nominations.\n Fonda made his mark early as a Broadway actor and made his Hollywood film debut in 1935.  His film career began to gain momentum with roles such as Bette Davis's fianc\u00e9e in her Academy Award-winning performance in Jezebel (1938), brother Frank in Jesse James (1939), and the future President in Young Mr. Lincoln (1939), directed by John Ford.  His early career peaked with his Academy Award-nominated performance as Tom Joad in The Grapes of Wrath (1940), about an Oklahoma family who moved to California during the Dust Bowl 1930s. This film is widely considered to be among the greatest American films, based on a novel of the same name by Nobel laureate for literature, John Steinbeck.\n In 1941 he starred opposite Barbara Stanwyck in the screwball comedy classic The Lady Eve. Book-ending his service in WWII were his starring roles in two highly regarded westerns: The Ox-Bow Incident (1943) and My Darling Clementine (1946), the latter directed by John Ford, and he also starred in Ford's western Fort Apache (1948). After a seven-year break from films, during which Fonda focused on stage productions, he returned with the WWII war-boat ensemble Mister Roberts (1955). In 1956, at the age of fifty-one, he played the title role as the thirty-eight-year-old Manny Balestrero in Alfred Hitchcock's thriller The Wrong Man. In 1957 he starred as Juror No.8, the hold-out juror, in 12 Angry Men.  Fonda, who was also the co-producer of this film, won the BAFTA award for Best Foreign Actor.\n Later in his career, Fonda moved into darker roles, such as the villain in the epic Once Upon a Time in the West (1968), underrated and a box office disappointment at its time of release, but now regarded as one of the best westerns of all time.  He also played in lighter-hearted fare such as Yours, Mine and Ours with Lucille Ball, but also often played important military figures, such as a colonel in Battle of the Bulge (1965), and Admiral Nimitz in Midway (1976).  He won the Academy Award for Best Actor at the 54th Academy Awards for his final film role in On Golden Pond (1981), which also starred Katharine Hepburn and his daughter Jane Fonda, but was too ill to attend the ceremony. He died from heart disease a few months later.\n Fonda was the patriarch of a family of famous actors, including daughter Jane Fonda, son Peter Fonda, granddaughter Bridget Fonda, and grandson Troy Garity. His family and close friends called him \"Hank\". In 1999 he was named the sixth-Greatest Male Screen Legends of the Classic Hollywood Era (stars with a film debut by 1950) by the American Film Institute.\n Born in Grand Island, Nebraska on May 16, 1905, Henry Jaynes Fonda was the son of printer William Brace Fonda, and his wife, Herberta (Jaynes). The family moved to Omaha, Nebraska in 1906.[2]\n Fonda's patriline originates with an ancestor from Genoa, Italy, who migrated to the Netherlands in the 15th century.[3] In 1642, a branch of the Fonda family immigrated to the Dutch colony of New Netherland on the East Coast of North America.[3][4] They were among the first Dutch population to settle in what is now upstate New York, establishing the town of Fonda, New York.[3] By 1888, many of their descendants had relocated to Nebraska.[3]\n Fonda was brought up as a Christian Scientist, though he was baptized an Episcopalian at St. Stephen's Episcopal Church[citation needed] in Grand Island. He said, \"My whole damn family was nice.\" They were a close family and highly supportive, especially in health matters, as they avoided doctors due to their religion.[5] Despite having a religious background, he later became an agnostic.[6] Fonda was a bashful, short boy who tended to avoid girls, except his sisters, and was a good skater, swimmer, and runner. He worked part-time in his father's print plant and imagined a possible career as a journalist. Later, he worked after school for the phone company. He also enjoyed drawing. Fonda was active in the Boy Scouts of America; Teichmann reports that he reached the rank of Eagle Scout.[7] However, this is denied elsewhere.[8] When he was about 14, his father took him to observe the brutal lynching of Will Brown during the Omaha race riot of 1919.[9] This enraged the young Fonda and he kept a keen awareness of prejudice for the rest of his life.[10] By his senior year in high school, Fonda had grown to more than six feet (1.8m) tall, but remained shy. He attended the University of Minnesota, where he majored in journalism,[11] but did not graduate. While at Minnesota he was a member of Chi Delta Xi fraternity, which later became Chi Phi's Gamma Delta chapter on that campus.[12] He took a job with the Retail Credit Company.\n At age 20, Fonda started his acting career at the Omaha Community Playhouse when his mother's friend Dodie Brando (mother of Marlon Brando) recommended that he try out for a juvenile part in You and I, in which he was cast as Ricky.[13] He was fascinated by the stage, learning everything from set construction to stage production, and embarrassed by his acting ability.[14] When he received the lead in Merton of the Movies, he realized the beauty of acting as a profession, as it allowed him to deflect attention from his own tongue-tied personality and create stage characters relying on someone else's scripted words. Fonda decided to quit his job and go east in 1928 to seek his fortune.\n He arrived on Cape Cod and played a minor role at the Cape Playhouse in Dennis, Massachusetts. A friend took him to Falmouth, MA where he joined and quickly became a valued member of the University Players, an intercollegiate summer stock company. There, he worked with Margaret Sullavan, his future wife.[15] James Stewart joined the Players a few months after Fonda left, though they were soon to become lifelong friends. Fonda left the Players at the end of their 1931\u20131932 season after appearing in his first professional role in The Jest, by Sem Benelli. Joshua Logan, a young sophomore at Princeton who had been double-cast in the show, gave Fonda the part of Tornaquinci, \"an elderly Italian man with a long white beard and even longer hair.\" Also in the cast of The Jest with Fonda and Logan were Bretaigne Windust, Kent Smith, and Eleanor Phelps.[16]\n Soon after, Fonda headed for New York City to be with his then wife, Margaret Sullavan. The marriage was brief, but when James Stewart came to New York his luck changed. Getting contact information from Joshua Logan, Jimmy, as he was called, Hank Fonda and these small town boys found they had a lot in common, as long as they didn't discuss politics. The two men became roommates and honed their skills on Broadway. Fonda appeared in theatrical productions from 1926 to 1934. They fared no better than many Americans in and out of work during the Great Depression, sometimes lacking enough money to take the subway.[17]\n Fonda got his first break in films when he was hired in 1935 as Janet Gaynor's leading man in 20th Century Fox's screen adaptation of The Farmer Takes a Wife; he reprised his role from the Broadway production of the same name, which had gained him recognition. Suddenly, Fonda was making $3,000 a week and dining with Hollywood stars such as Carole Lombard.[18] Stewart soon followed him to Hollywood, and they roomed together again, in lodgings next door to Greta Garbo. In 1935 Fonda starred in the RKO film I Dream Too Much with the opera star Lily Pons. The New York Times announced him as \"Henry Fonda, the most likable of the new crop of romantic juveniles.\"[19]\nFonda's film career blossomed as he costarred with Sylvia Sidney and Fred MacMurray in The Trail of the Lonesome Pine (1936), the first Technicolor movie filmed outdoors.\n He starred with ex-wife Margaret Sullavan in The Moon's Our Home, and a short rekindling of their relationship led to a brief but temporary consideration of remarriage. Fonda got the nod for the lead role in You Only Live Once (1937), also costarring Sidney, and directed by Fritz Lang. He starred opposite Bette Davis, who had picked him, in the film Jezebel (1938). This was followed by the title role in Young Mr. Lincoln (1939), his first collaboration with director John Ford, and that year he played Frank James in Jesse James (1939). Another 1939 film was Drums Along the Mohawk, also directed by Ford.\n Fonda's successes led Ford to recruit him to play Tom Joad in the film version of John Steinbeck's novel The Grapes of Wrath (1940). A reluctant Darryl Zanuck, who preferred Tyrone Power, insisted on Fonda's signing a seven-year contract with his studio, Twentieth Century-Fox.[20] Fonda agreed and was ultimately nominated for an Academy Award for his work in the film, which many consider to be his finest role. Fonda starred in Fritz Lang's The Return of Frank James (1940) with Gene Tierney. He then played opposite Barbara Stanwyck in Preston Sturges's The Lady Eve (1941), and again teamed with Tierney in the successful screwball comedy Rings on Her Fingers (1942). She was one of Fonda's favorite co-stars, and they appeared in three films together. He was acclaimed for his role in The Ox-Bow Incident (1943).\n Fonda enlisted in the United States Navy to fight in World War II, saying, \"I don't want to be in a fake war in a studio.\"[21] Previously, Stewart and he had helped raise funds for the defense of Britain.[22] Fonda served for three years, initially as a Quartermaster 3rd Class on the destroyer USS\u00a0Satterlee. He was later commissioned as a Lieutenant Junior Grade in Air Combat Intelligence in the Central Pacific and was awarded the Bronze Star Medal and Navy Presidential Unit Citation.[23]\n After the war, Fonda took a break from movies and attended Hollywood parties and enjoyed civilian life. Stewart and Fonda would listen to records and invite Johnny Mercer, Hoagy Carmichael, Dinah Shore, and Nat King Cole over for music, with the latter giving the family piano lessons.[24] Fonda played Wyatt Earp in My Darling Clementine (1946), which was directed by John Ford. Fonda did seven postwar films until his contract with Fox expired, the last being Otto Preminger's Daisy Kenyon (1947), opposite Joan Crawford. He starred in The Fugitive (1947), which was the first film of Ford's new production company, Argosy Pictures. In 1948 he appeared in a subsequent Argosy/Ford production, Fort Apache, as a rigid Army colonel, along with John Wayne and Shirley Temple in her first adult role.\n Refusing another long-term studio contract, Fonda returned to Broadway, wearing his own officer's cap to originate the title role in Mister Roberts, a comedy about the U.S. Navy, during World War II in the South Pacific Ocean where Fonda, a junior officer, Lt. Douglas A. Roberts wages a private war against a tyrannical captain. He won a 1948 Tony Award for the part. Fonda followed that by reprising his performance in the national tour and with successful stage runs in Point of No Return and The Caine Mutiny Court-Martial. After an eight-year absence from films, he starred in the same role in the 1955 film version of Mister Roberts with James Cagney, William Powell, and Jack Lemmon, continuing a pattern of bringing his acclaimed stage roles to life on the big screen. On the set of Mister Roberts, Fonda came to blows with director John Ford, who punched him during filming, and Fonda vowed never to work for the director again. While he kept that vow for years, Fonda spoke glowingly of Ford in Peter Bogdanovich's documentary Directed by John Ford and in a documentary on Ford's career alongside Ford and James Stewart. Fonda refused to participate until he learned that Ford had insisted on casting Fonda as the lead in the film version of Mr. Roberts, reviving Fonda's film career after concentrating on the stage for years.\n After Mr. Roberts, Fonda was next in Paramount Pictures's production of Leo Tolstoy's epic novel War and Peace (1956) about French Emperor Napoleon's invasion of Russia in 1812, in which he played Pierre Bezukhov opposite Audrey Hepburn; it took two years to shoot. Fonda worked with Alfred Hitchcock in 1956, playing a man falsely accused of robbery in The Wrong Man; the unusual semidocumentary work of Hitchcock was based on an actual incident and partly filmed on location.\n In 1957 Fonda made his first foray into producing with 12 Angry Men, in which he also starred. The film was based on a teleplay and a script by Reginald Rose, and directed by Sidney Lumet. The low-budget production was completed in 17 days of filming, mostly in one claustrophobic jury room. It had a strong cast, including also Jack Klugman, Lee J. Cobb, Martin Balsam, and E. G. Marshall. The intense story about twelve jurors deciding the fate of a young man accused of murder was well received by critics worldwide. Fonda shared the Academy Award and Golden Globe nominations with co-producer Reginald Rose, and won the 1958 BAFTA Award for Best Actor for his performance as \"Juror #8\". Early on, the film drew poorly, but after gaining recognition and awards, it proved a success. In spite of the outcome, Fonda vowed that he would never produce a movie again, fearing that failing as a producer might derail his acting career.[25] After acting in the western movies The Tin Star (1957) and Warlock (1959), Fonda returned to the production seat for the NBC western television series The Deputy (1959\u20131961), in which he starred as Marshal Simon Fry. His co-stars were Allen Case and Read Morgan.\n During the 1960s, Fonda performed in a number of war and western epics, including 1962's The Longest Day and the Cinerama production How the West Was Won, 1965's In Harm's Way, and Battle of the Bulge. In the Cold War suspense film Fail-Safe (1964), Fonda played the President of the United States who tries to avert a nuclear holocaust through tense negotiations with the Soviets after American bombers are mistakenly ordered to attack the USSR. He also returned to more light-hearted cinema in Spencer's Mountain (1963), which was the inspiration for the 1970s TV series, The Waltons, based on the Great Depression of the 1930s memories of Earl Hamner, Jr..\n Fonda appeared against type as the villain 'Frank' in 1968's Once Upon a Time in the West. After initially turning down the role, he was convinced to accept it by actor Eli Wallach and director Sergio Leone (who had previously tried to hire him to portray the Man with No Name in his Dollars Trilogy, a role that was later taken on by Clint Eastwood), who flew from Italy to the United States to persuade him to take the part. Fonda had planned on wearing a pair of brown-colored contact lenses, but Leone preferred the paradox of contrasting close-up shots of Fonda's innocent-looking blue eyes with the vicious personality of the character Fonda portrayed.\n Fonda's relationship with Jimmy Stewart survived their disagreements over politics \u2013 Fonda was a liberal Democrat, and Stewart a conservative Republican. After a heated argument, they avoided talking politics with each other. The two men teamed up for 1968's Firecreek, where Fonda again played the heavy. In 1970 Fonda and Stewart co-starred in the western The Cheyenne Social Club, in which they humorously argued politics. They had first appeared together on film in On Our Merry Way (1948), an episodic comedy which also starred William Demarest and Fred MacMurray and featured a grown-up Carl \"Alfalfa\" Switzer, who had acted as a child in the Our Gang movie serials of the 1930s.[26]\n Despite approaching his seventies, Fonda continued to work in theater, television and film through the 1970s. In 1970 Fonda appeared in three films; the most successful was The Cheyenne Social Club. The other two films were Too Late the Hero, in which Fonda played a secondary role, and There Was a Crooked Man, about Paris Pitman Jr. (played by Kirk Douglas) trying to escape from an Arizona prison.\n Fonda returned to both foreign and television productions, which provided career sustenance through a decade in which many aging screen actors suffered waning careers. He starred in the ABC television series The Smith Family between 1971 and 1972. A TV-movie adaptation of John Steinbeck's novel, 1973's The Red Pony, earned Fonda an Emmy nomination. After the unsuccessful Hollywood melodrama, Ash Wednesday, he filmed three Italian productions released in 1973 and 1974. The most successful of these, My Name Is Nobody, presented Fonda in a rare comedic performance as an old gunslinger whose plans to retire are dampened by a \"fan\" of sorts.\n Fonda continued stage acting throughout his last years, including several demanding roles in Broadway plays. He returned to Broadway in 1974 for the biographical drama, Clarence Darrow, for which he was nominated for a Tony Award. Fonda's health had been deteriorating for years, but his first outward symptoms occurred after a performance of the play in April 1974, when he collapsed from exhaustion. After the appearance of a cardiac arrhythmia brought on by prostate cancer, he had a pacemaker installed following cancer surgery. Fonda returned to the play in 1975. After the run of a 1978 play, First Monday of October, he took the advice of his doctors and quit plays, though he continued to star in films and television.\n Fonda appeared in a revival of The Time of Your Life that opened on March 17, 1972, at the Huntington Hartford Theater in Los Angeles, where Fonda, Richard Dreyfuss, Gloria Grahame, Ron Thompson, Strother Martin, Jane Alexander, Lewis J. Stadlen, Richard X. Slattery, and Pepper Martin were among the cast with Edwin Sherin directing.[27]\n In 1976, Fonda appeared in several notable television productions, the first being Collision Course, the story of the volatile relationship between President Harry Truman (E. G. Marshall) and General MacArthur (Fonda), produced by ABC. After an appearance in the acclaimed Showtime broadcast of Almos' a Man, based on a story by Richard Wright, he starred in the epic NBC miniseries Captains and Kings, based on Taylor Caldwell's novel. Three years later, he appeared in ABC's Roots: The Next Generations, but the miniseries was overshadowed by its predecessor, Roots. Also in 1976, Fonda starred in the World War II blockbuster Midway.\n Fonda finished the 1970s in a number of disaster films. The first of these was the 1977 Italian killer octopus thriller Tentacles and Rollercoaster, in which Fonda appeared with Richard Widmark and a young Helen Hunt. He performed again with Widmark, Olivia de Havilland, Fred MacMurray, and Jos\u00e9 Ferrer in the killer bee action film The Swarm. He also acted in the global disaster film Meteor (his second role as a sitting President of the United States after Fail-Safe), with Sean Connery, Natalie Wood, and Karl Malden, and the Canadian production City on Fire, which also featured Shelley Winters and Ava Gardner. Fonda had a small role with his son, Peter, in Wanda Nevada (1979), with Brooke Shields.\n As Fonda's health declined and he took longer breaks between filming, critics began to acknowledge the value of his extensive body of work. In 1979, he received the Golden Plate Award of the American Academy of Achievement. His Golden Plate was presented by Awards Council member Jimmy Stewart.[28] In 1979, he was inducted into the American Theater Hall of Fame for his achievements on Broadway.[29] Lifetime Achievement awards from the Golden Globes and Academy Awards followed in 1980 and 1981, respectively.\n Fonda continued to act into the early 1980s, though all but one of the productions in which he was featured before his death were for television. The television works included the live performance of Preston Jones's The Oldest Living Graduate and the Emmy-nominated Gideon's Trumpet (co-starring Fay Wray in her last performance) about Clarence Gideon's fight to have the right to publicly funded legal counsel for the indigent.\n On Golden Pond in 1981, the film adaptation of Ernest Thompson's play, marked one final professional and personal triumph for Fonda. Directed by Mark Rydell, the project provided unprecedented collaborations between Fonda and Katharine Hepburn, along with Fonda and his daughter, Jane. The elder Fonda played an emotionally brittle and distant father who becomes more accessible at the end of his life. Jane Fonda has said that elements of the story mimicked their real-life relationship, and helped them resolve certain issues. She bought the film rights in the hope that her father would play the role, and later described it as \"a gift to my father that was so unbelievably successful.\"[30]\n Premiered in December 1981, the film was well received by critics, and after a limited release on December 4, On Golden Pond developed enough of an audience to be widely released on January 22. With 10 Academy Award nominations, the film earned nearly $120\u00a0million at the box office, becoming an unexpected blockbuster. In addition to wins for Hepburn (Best Actress), and Thompson (Screenplay), On Golden Pond brought Fonda his only Oscar - for Best Actor (he was the oldest recipient of the award; it also earned him a Golden Globe Best Actor award). Fonda was by that point too ill to attend the ceremony, and his daughter Jane accepted on his behalf. She said when accepting the award that her dad would probably quip, \"Well, ain't I lucky.\" Years later, Fonda's performance would be remembered as a \"brutally honest portrayal of frightened old age.\"[31]\n Fonda's final performance was in the 1981 television drama Summer Solstice[32] with Myrna Loy. It was filmed after On Golden Pond had wrapped and Fonda was in rapidly declining health.\n Fonda was married five times and had three children, one of them adopted. His marriage to Margaret Sullavan in 1931 soon ended in separation, which was finalized in a 1933 divorce.\n In 1936 he married Frances Ford Seymour Brokaw widow of a wealthy industrialist, George Tuttle Brokaw.[33] The Brokaws had a daughter, Frances de Villiers, nicknamed \"Pan\", who had been born soon after the Brokaws marriage in 1931.[34]\n Fonda met his future wife Frances at Denham Studios in England on the set of Wings of the Morning,[35] the first British picture to be filmed in Technicolor. They had two children, Jane (born December 21, 1937) and Peter (February 23, 1940\u2013August 16, 2019), both of whom became successful actors. Jane has won two Best Actress Academy Awards, and Peter was nominated for two Oscars, one for Best Actor.\n In August 1949, Fonda announced to Frances that he wanted a divorce so he could remarry; their 13 years of marriage had not been happy ones for him.[36] Devastated by Fonda's confession, and plagued by emotional problems for many years, Frances went into the Austen Riggs Psychiatric Hospital in January 1950 for treatment. She committed suicide there on April 14. Before her death, she had written six notes to various individuals, but left no final message for her husband. Fonda quickly arranged a private funeral with only himself and his mother-in-law, Sophie Seymour, in attendance.[37] Years later, Dr. Margaret Gibson, the psychiatrist who had treated Frances at Austen Riggs, described Henry Fonda as \"a cold, self-absorbed person, a complete narcissist.\"[38]\n Later in 1950, Fonda married Susan Blanchard, his mistress. She was 21 years old, the daughter of Australian-born interior designer Dorothy Hammerstein, and the step-daughter of Oscar Hammerstein II.[39] Together, they adopted a daughter, Amy Fishman (born 1953).[40] They divorced three years later. Blanchard was in awe of Fonda, and she described her role in the marriage as \"a geisha\", doing everything she could to please him, dealing with and solving problems he would not acknowledge.[41]\n In 1957 Fonda married the Italian baroness Afdera Franchetti.[42] They divorced in 1961. Soon after, in 1965, Fonda married Shirlee Mae Adams (born in 1932), and remained with her until his death in 1982.\n Fonda's relationship with his children has been described as \"emotionally distant\". Fonda loathed displays of feeling in himself or others, and this was a consistent part of his character. Whenever he felt that his emotional wall was being breached, he had outbursts of anger, exhibiting a furious temper that terrified his family.[43] In Peter Fonda's 1998 autobiography Don't Tell Dad (1998), he described how he was never sure how his father felt about him. He never volunteered to his father that he loved him until he was elderly, and Peter finally heard, \"I love you, son.\"[44] His daughter Jane rejected her father's friendships with Republican actors such as John Wayne and James Stewart. Their relationship became extremely strained as Jane Fonda became a left-wing activist.\n Jane Fonda reported feeling detached from her father, especially during her early acting days. In 1958 she met Lee Strasberg while visiting her father at Malibu. The Fonda and Strasberg families were neighbors, and she had developed a friendship with Strasberg's daughter, Susan. Jane Fonda began studying acting with Strasberg, learning the techniques of \"The Method\" of which Strasberg was a renowned proponent. This proved to be a pivotal point in her career. As Jane Fonda developed her skill as an actress, she became frustrated with her father's talent that, to her, appeared a demonstration of effortless ability.[45]\n Fonda was an ardent supporter of the Democratic Party and \"an admirer\" of U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt.[46] In 1960 Fonda appeared in a campaign commercial for presidential candidate John F. Kennedy. The ad focused on Kennedy's naval service during World War II, specifically the famous PT-109 incident.[46] He was initially a registered Republican, but switched parties because the Republican party did not represent his values.[47]\n In the late 1950s, when Jane Fonda asked her father how he prepared before going on stage, she was baffled by his answer, \"I don't know, I stand there, I think about my wife, Afdera, I don't know.\"\n The writer Al Aronowitz, while working on a profile of Jane Fonda for The Saturday Evening Post in the 1960s, asked Henry Fonda about method acting: \"I can't articulate about the Method\", he told me, \"because I never studied it. I don't mean to suggest that I have any feelings one way or the other about it...I don't know what the Method is and I don't care what the Method is. Everybody's got a method. Everybody can't articulate about their method, and I can't, if I have a method\u2014and Jane sometimes says that I use the Method, that is, the capital letter Method, without being aware of it. Maybe I do; it doesn't matter.\"[48]\n Aronowitz reported Jane saying, \"My father can't articulate the way he works. He just can't do it. He's not even conscious of what he does, and it made him nervous for me to try to articulate what I was trying to do. And I sensed that immediately, so we did very little talking about it...he said, 'Shut up, I don't want to hear about it.' He didn't want me to tell him about it, you know. He wanted to make fun of it.\"[48]\n Fonda died at his Los Angeles home on August 12, 1982, from heart disease. Fonda's wife, Shirlee, his daughter Jane, and his son Peter were at his side that day.[49] He suffered from prostate cancer, but this did not directly cause his death and was noted only as a concurrent ailment on his death certificate.\n Fonda requested that no funeral be held, and his body was cremated. President Ronald Reagan, a former actor himself, hailed Fonda as \"a true professional dedicated to excellence in his craft. He graced the screen with a sincerity and accuracy which made him a legend.\"[50]\n The home where Fonda was born in 1905 is preserved at The Stuhr Museum of the Prairie Pioneer in Grand Island, Nebraska.\n Fonda is widely recognized as one of the Hollywood greats of the classic era. On the centenary of his birth, May 16, 2005, Turner Classic Movies (TCM) honored Fonda with a marathon of his films. Also in May 2005, the United States Post Office released a 37-cent postage stamp with an artist's drawing of Fonda as part of their \"Hollywood legends\" series.[21] The Fonda Theatre in Hollywood, originally known as the Carter DeHaven Music Box, was named for the actor in 1985 by the Nederlander Organization.\n In Joseph Heller's satirical novel Catch-22, there is a running joke that fictional character Major Major Major Major resembles Henry Fonda. Philip D. Beidler comments that \"one of the novel's great absurd jokes is the character's bewildering resemblance to Henry Fonda\".[51] Taking into account when Catch-22 was written, this most likely refers to Fonda circa about 1955, when he starred in the film Mister Roberts.\n From the beginning of his career in 1935 through his last projects in 1981, Fonda appeared in 106 films, television programs, and shorts. Through the course of his career, he appeared in many films, including such classics as 12 Angry Men and The Ox-Bow Incident. He was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Actor for his role in 1940's The Grapes of Wrath and won for his part in 1981's On Golden Pond. Fonda made his mark in Westerns (which included his most villainous role as Frank in Once Upon a Time in the West) and war films, and made frequent appearances in both television and foreign productions late in his career.\n ", "tags": ["1905 births", "1982 deaths", "20th Century Fox contract players", "20th-century American male actors", "Academy Honorary Award recipients", "Former Christian Scientists", "American agnostics", "American beekeepers", "American male film actors", "American male stage actors", "American male television actors", "United States Navy personnel of World War II", "American people of Dutch descent", "Best Actor Academy Award winners", "Best Drama Actor Golden Globe (film) winners", "Best Foreign Actor BAFTA Award winners", "California Democrats", "Cecil B. DeMille Award Golden Globe winners", "Fonda family", "Grammy Award winners", "Kennedy Center honorees", "Male actors from Omaha, Nebraska", "Male Spaghetti Western actors", "Male Western (genre) film actors", "Military personnel from Nebraska", "Tony Award winners", "United States Navy officers", "University of Minnesota School of Journalism and Mass Communication alumni", "Vaudeville performers", "People from Grand Island, Nebraska", "AFI Life Achievement Award recipients", "Webarchive template wayback links", "CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown", "Harv and Sfn no-target errors", "Articles with short description", "Short description matches Wikidata", "Use American English from September 2019", "All Wikipedia articles written in American English", "Use mdy dates from September 2019", "Articles with hCards", "All articles with unsourced statements", "Articles with unsourced statements from October 2010", "Commons link from Wikidata", "Articles with IBDb links", "All articles with dead external links", "Articles with dead external links from January 2017", "Wikipedia articles with BNE identifiers", "Wikipedia articles with BNF identifiers", "Wikipedia articles with CANTIC identifiers", "Wikipedia articles with GND identifiers", "Wikipedia articles with ISNI identifiers", "Wikipedia articles with LCCN identifiers", "Wikipedia articles with MusicBrainz identifiers", "Wikipedia articles with NARA identifiers", "Wikipedia articles with NDL identifiers", "Wikipedia articles with NKC identifiers", "Wikipedia articles with NLA identifiers", "Wikipedia articles with NLK identifiers", "Wikipedia articles with NTA identifiers", "Wikipedia articles with PLWABN identifiers", "Wikipedia articles with SELIBR identifiers", "Wikipedia articles with SNAC-ID identifiers", "Wikipedia articles with SUDOC identifiers", "Wikipedia articles with Trove identifiers", "Wikipedia articles with VIAF identifiers", "Wikipedia articles with WORLDCATID identifiers"], "raw": "American actor\n\n\nHenry FondaFonda in a publicity still, 1959BornHenry Jaynes Fonda(1905-05-16)May 16, 1905Grand Island, Nebraska, U.S.DiedAugust 12, 1982(1982-08-12) (aged\u00a077)Los Angeles, California, U.S.Alma\u00a0materUniversity of MinnesotaOccupationActorYears\u00a0active1928\u20131982Political partyDemocraticSpouse(s)Margaret Sullavan\n\u200b \u200b(m.\u00a01931; div.\u00a01933)\u200b\nFrances Seymour Brokaw\n\u200b \u200b(m.\u00a01936; died\u00a01950)\u200b\nSusan Blanchard\n\u200b \u200b(m.\u00a01950; div.\u00a01956)\u200b\nAfdera Franchetti\n\u200b \u200b(m.\u00a01957; div.\u00a01961)\u200b\nShirlee Mae Adams \u200b(m.\u00a01965)\u200bChildren3; including Jane and Peter FondaRelativesBridget Fonda (granddaughter)Troy Garity (grandson)\nHenry Jaynes Fonda (May 16, 1905 \u2013 August 12, 1982) was an American film and stage actor[1] who had a career that spanned five decades in Hollywood. Fonda cultivated a strong, appealing screen image in several films now considered to be classics, earning one Academy Award for Best Actor on two nominations.\nFonda made his mark early as a Broadway actor and made his Hollywood film debut in 1935.  His film career began to gain momentum with roles such as Bette Davis's fianc\u00e9e in her Academy Award-winning performance in Jezebel (1938), brother Frank in Jesse James (1939), and the future President in Young Mr. Lincoln (1939), directed by John Ford.  His early career peaked with his Academy Award-nominated performance as Tom Joad in The Grapes of Wrath (1940), about an Oklahoma family who moved to California during the Dust Bowl 1930s. This film is widely considered to be among the greatest American films, based on a novel of the same name by Nobel laureate for literature, John Steinbeck.\nIn 1941 he starred opposite Barbara Stanwyck in the screwball comedy classic The Lady Eve. Book-ending his service in WWII were his starring roles in two highly regarded westerns: The Ox-Bow Incident (1943) and My Darling Clementine (1946), the latter directed by John Ford, and he also starred in Ford's western Fort Apache (1948). After a seven-year break from films, during which Fonda focused on stage productions, he returned with the WWII war-boat ensemble Mister Roberts (1955). In 1956, at the age of fifty-one, he played the title role as the thirty-eight-year-old Manny Balestrero in Alfred Hitchcock's thriller The Wrong Man. In 1957 he starred as Juror No.8, the hold-out juror, in 12 Angry Men.  Fonda, who was also the co-producer of this film, won the BAFTA award for Best Foreign Actor.\nLater in his career, Fonda moved into darker roles, such as the villain in the epic Once Upon a Time in the West (1968), underrated and a box office disappointment at its time of release, but now regarded as one of the best westerns of all time.  He also played in lighter-hearted fare such as Yours, Mine and Ours with Lucille Ball, but also often played important military figures, such as a colonel in Battle of the Bulge (1965), and Admiral Nimitz in Midway (1976).  He won the Academy Award for Best Actor at the 54th Academy Awards for his final film role in On Golden Pond (1981), which also starred Katharine Hepburn and his daughter Jane Fonda, but was too ill to attend the ceremony. He died from heart disease a few months later.\nFonda was the patriarch of a family of famous actors, including daughter Jane Fonda, son Peter Fonda, granddaughter Bridget Fonda, and grandson Troy Garity. His family and close friends called him \"Hank\". In 1999 he was named the sixth-Greatest Male Screen Legends of the Classic Hollywood Era (stars with a film debut by 1950) by the American Film Institute.\n\nContents\n\n1 Family history and early life\n2 Career\n\n2.1 Early stage work\n2.2 Entering Hollywood\n2.3 Postwar career\n2.4 Later career\n\n\n3 Personal life\n\n3.1 Marriages and children\n3.2 Politics\n3.3 On acting\n\n\n4 Death and legacy\n5 In popular culture\n6 Filmography\n7 Broadway stage performances\n8 Awards\n9 References\n10 Bibliography\n11 External links\n\n\nFamily history and early life[edit]\n Jane Fonda, Henry Fonda and Peter Fonda in the 1950s\nBorn in Grand Island, Nebraska on May 16, 1905, Henry Jaynes Fonda was the son of printer William Brace Fonda, and his wife, Herberta (Jaynes). The family moved to Omaha, Nebraska in 1906.[2]\nFonda's patriline originates with an ancestor from Genoa, Italy, who migrated to the Netherlands in the 15th century.[3] In 1642, a branch of the Fonda family immigrated to the Dutch colony of New Netherland on the East Coast of North America.[3][4] They were among the first Dutch population to settle in what is now upstate New York, establishing the town of Fonda, New York.[3] By 1888, many of their descendants had relocated to Nebraska.[3]\nFonda was brought up as a Christian Scientist, though he was baptized an Episcopalian at St. Stephen's Episcopal Church[citation needed] in Grand Island. He said, \"My whole damn family was nice.\" They were a close family and highly supportive, especially in health matters, as they avoided doctors due to their religion.[5] Despite having a religious background, he later became an agnostic.[6] Fonda was a bashful, short boy who tended to avoid girls, except his sisters, and was a good skater, swimmer, and runner. He worked part-time in his father's print plant and imagined a possible career as a journalist. Later, he worked after school for the phone company. He also enjoyed drawing. Fonda was active in the Boy Scouts of America; Teichmann reports that he reached the rank of Eagle Scout.[7] However, this is denied elsewhere.[8] When he was about 14, his father took him to observe the brutal lynching of Will Brown during the Omaha race riot of 1919.[9] This enraged the young Fonda and he kept a keen awareness of prejudice for the rest of his life.[10] By his senior year in high school, Fonda had grown to more than six feet (1.8m) tall, but remained shy. He attended the University of Minnesota, where he majored in journalism,[11] but did not graduate. While at Minnesota he was a member of Chi Delta Xi fraternity, which later became Chi Phi's Gamma Delta chapter on that campus.[12] He took a job with the Retail Credit Company.\n\nCareer[edit]\nEarly stage work[edit]\nAt age 20, Fonda started his acting career at the Omaha Community Playhouse when his mother's friend Dodie Brando (mother of Marlon Brando) recommended that he try out for a juvenile part in You and I, in which he was cast as Ricky.[13] He was fascinated by the stage, learning everything from set construction to stage production, and embarrassed by his acting ability.[14] When he received the lead in Merton of the Movies, he realized the beauty of acting as a profession, as it allowed him to deflect attention from his own tongue-tied personality and create stage characters relying on someone else's scripted words. Fonda decided to quit his job and go east in 1928 to seek his fortune.\nHe arrived on Cape Cod and played a minor role at the Cape Playhouse in Dennis, Massachusetts. A friend took him to Falmouth, MA where he joined and quickly became a valued member of the University Players, an intercollegiate summer stock company. There, he worked with Margaret Sullavan, his future wife.[15] James Stewart joined the Players a few months after Fonda left, though they were soon to become lifelong friends. Fonda left the Players at the end of their 1931\u20131932 season after appearing in his first professional role in The Jest, by Sem Benelli. Joshua Logan, a young sophomore at Princeton who had been double-cast in the show, gave Fonda the part of Tornaquinci, \"an elderly Italian man with a long white beard and even longer hair.\" Also in the cast of The Jest with Fonda and Logan were Bretaigne Windust, Kent Smith, and Eleanor Phelps.[16]\nSoon after, Fonda headed for New York City to be with his then wife, Margaret Sullavan. The marriage was brief, but when James Stewart came to New York his luck changed. Getting contact information from Joshua Logan, Jimmy, as he was called, Hank Fonda and these small town boys found they had a lot in common, as long as they didn't discuss politics. The two men became roommates and honed their skills on Broadway. Fonda appeared in theatrical productions from 1926 to 1934. They fared no better than many Americans in and out of work during the Great Depression, sometimes lacking enough money to take the subway.[17]\n\nEntering Hollywood[edit]\n Fonda in Jezebel\nFonda got his first break in films when he was hired in 1935 as Janet Gaynor's leading man in 20th Century Fox's screen adaptation of The Farmer Takes a Wife; he reprised his role from the Broadway production of the same name, which had gained him recognition. Suddenly, Fonda was making $3,000 a week and dining with Hollywood stars such as Carole Lombard.[18] Stewart soon followed him to Hollywood, and they roomed together again, in lodgings next door to Greta Garbo. In 1935 Fonda starred in the RKO film I Dream Too Much with the opera star Lily Pons. The New York Times announced him as \"Henry Fonda, the most likable of the new crop of romantic juveniles.\"[19]\nFonda's film career blossomed as he costarred with Sylvia Sidney and Fred MacMurray in The Trail of the Lonesome Pine (1936), the first Technicolor movie filmed outdoors.\nHe starred with ex-wife Margaret Sullavan in The Moon's Our Home, and a short rekindling of their relationship led to a brief but temporary consideration of remarriage. Fonda got the nod for the lead role in You Only Live Once (1937), also costarring Sidney, and directed by Fritz Lang. He starred opposite Bette Davis, who had picked him, in the film Jezebel (1938). This was followed by the title role in Young Mr. Lincoln (1939), his first collaboration with director John Ford, and that year he played Frank James in Jesse James (1939). Another 1939 film was Drums Along the Mohawk, also directed by Ford.\n\n Fonda in The Lady Eve\nFonda's successes led Ford to recruit him to play Tom Joad in the film version of John Steinbeck's novel The Grapes of Wrath (1940). A reluctant Darryl Zanuck, who preferred Tyrone Power, insisted on Fonda's signing a seven-year contract with his studio, Twentieth Century-Fox.[20] Fonda agreed and was ultimately nominated for an Academy Award for his work in the film, which many consider to be his finest role. Fonda starred in Fritz Lang's The Return of Frank James (1940) with Gene Tierney. He then played opposite Barbara Stanwyck in Preston Sturges's The Lady Eve (1941), and again teamed with Tierney in the successful screwball comedy Rings on Her Fingers (1942). She was one of Fonda's favorite co-stars, and they appeared in three films together. He was acclaimed for his role in The Ox-Bow Incident (1943).\n\n Fonda after enlisting in the United States Navy in November 1942\nFonda enlisted in the United States Navy to fight in World War II, saying, \"I don't want to be in a fake war in a studio.\"[21] Previously, Stewart and he had helped raise funds for the defense of Britain.[22] Fonda served for three years, initially as a Quartermaster 3rd Class on the destroyer USS\u00a0Satterlee. He was later commissioned as a Lieutenant Junior Grade in Air Combat Intelligence in the Central Pacific and was awarded the Bronze Star Medal and Navy Presidential Unit Citation.[23]\n\nPostwar career[edit]\nAfter the war, Fonda took a break from movies and attended Hollywood parties and enjoyed civilian life. Stewart and Fonda would listen to records and invite Johnny Mercer, Hoagy Carmichael, Dinah Shore, and Nat King Cole over for music, with the latter giving the family piano lessons.[24] Fonda played Wyatt Earp in My Darling Clementine (1946), which was directed by John Ford. Fonda did seven postwar films until his contract with Fox expired, the last being Otto Preminger's Daisy Kenyon (1947), opposite Joan Crawford. He starred in The Fugitive (1947), which was the first film of Ford's new production company, Argosy Pictures. In 1948 he appeared in a subsequent Argosy/Ford production, Fort Apache, as a rigid Army colonel, along with John Wayne and Shirley Temple in her first adult role.\n\n Fonda in Navy uniform\n Fonda in Mister Roberts\nRefusing another long-term studio contract, Fonda returned to Broadway, wearing his own officer's cap to originate the title role in Mister Roberts, a comedy about the U.S. Navy, during World War II in the South Pacific Ocean where Fonda, a junior officer, Lt. Douglas A. Roberts wages a private war against a tyrannical captain. He won a 1948 Tony Award for the part. Fonda followed that by reprising his performance in the national tour and with successful stage runs in Point of No Return and The Caine Mutiny Court-Martial. After an eight-year absence from films, he starred in the same role in the 1955 film version of Mister Roberts with James Cagney, William Powell, and Jack Lemmon, continuing a pattern of bringing his acclaimed stage roles to life on the big screen. On the set of Mister Roberts, Fonda came to blows with director John Ford, who punched him during filming, and Fonda vowed never to work for the director again. While he kept that vow for years, Fonda spoke glowingly of Ford in Peter Bogdanovich's documentary Directed by John Ford and in a documentary on Ford's career alongside Ford and James Stewart. Fonda refused to participate until he learned that Ford had insisted on casting Fonda as the lead in the film version of Mr. Roberts, reviving Fonda's film career after concentrating on the stage for years.\nAfter Mr. Roberts, Fonda was next in Paramount Pictures's production of Leo Tolstoy's epic novel War and Peace (1956) about French Emperor Napoleon's invasion of Russia in 1812, in which he played Pierre Bezukhov opposite Audrey Hepburn; it took two years to shoot. Fonda worked with Alfred Hitchcock in 1956, playing a man falsely accused of robbery in The Wrong Man; the unusual semidocumentary work of Hitchcock was based on an actual incident and partly filmed on location.\n\n Lauren Bacall, Humphrey Bogart, and Fonda in a live 1955 TV version of The Petrified Forest\nIn 1957 Fonda made his first foray into producing with 12 Angry Men, in which he also starred. The film was based on a teleplay and a script by Reginald Rose, and directed by Sidney Lumet. The low-budget production was completed in 17 days of filming, mostly in one claustrophobic jury room. It had a strong cast, including also Jack Klugman, Lee J. Cobb, Martin Balsam, and E. G. Marshall. The intense story about twelve jurors deciding the fate of a young man accused of murder was well received by critics worldwide. Fonda shared the Academy Award and Golden Globe nominations with co-producer Reginald Rose, and won the 1958 BAFTA Award for Best Actor for his performance as \"Juror #8\". Early on, the film drew poorly, but after gaining recognition and awards, it proved a success. In spite of the outcome, Fonda vowed that he would never produce a movie again, fearing that failing as a producer might derail his acting career.[25] After acting in the western movies The Tin Star (1957) and Warlock (1959), Fonda returned to the production seat for the NBC western television series The Deputy (1959\u20131961), in which he starred as Marshal Simon Fry. His co-stars were Allen Case and Read Morgan.\n\n Fonda in How the West Was Won\nDuring the 1960s, Fonda performed in a number of war and western epics, including 1962's The Longest Day and the Cinerama production How the West Was Won, 1965's In Harm's Way, and Battle of the Bulge. In the Cold War suspense film Fail-Safe (1964), Fonda played the President of the United States who tries to avert a nuclear holocaust through tense negotiations with the Soviets after American bombers are mistakenly ordered to attack the USSR. He also returned to more light-hearted cinema in Spencer's Mountain (1963), which was the inspiration for the 1970s TV series, The Waltons, based on the Great Depression of the 1930s memories of Earl Hamner, Jr..\nFonda appeared against type as the villain 'Frank' in 1968's Once Upon a Time in the West. After initially turning down the role, he was convinced to accept it by actor Eli Wallach and director Sergio Leone (who had previously tried to hire him to portray the Man with No Name in his Dollars Trilogy, a role that was later taken on by Clint Eastwood), who flew from Italy to the United States to persuade him to take the part. Fonda had planned on wearing a pair of brown-colored contact lenses, but Leone preferred the paradox of contrasting close-up shots of Fonda's innocent-looking blue eyes with the vicious personality of the character Fonda portrayed.\nFonda's relationship with Jimmy Stewart survived their disagreements over politics \u2013 Fonda was a liberal Democrat, and Stewart a conservative Republican. After a heated argument, they avoided talking politics with each other. The two men teamed up for 1968's Firecreek, where Fonda again played the heavy. In 1970 Fonda and Stewart co-starred in the western The Cheyenne Social Club, in which they humorously argued politics. They had first appeared together on film in On Our Merry Way (1948), an episodic comedy which also starred William Demarest and Fred MacMurray and featured a grown-up Carl \"Alfalfa\" Switzer, who had acted as a child in the Our Gang movie serials of the 1930s.[26]\n\nLater career[edit]\nDespite approaching his seventies, Fonda continued to work in theater, television and film through the 1970s. In 1970 Fonda appeared in three films; the most successful was The Cheyenne Social Club. The other two films were Too Late the Hero, in which Fonda played a secondary role, and There Was a Crooked Man, about Paris Pitman Jr. (played by Kirk Douglas) trying to escape from an Arizona prison.\nFonda returned to both foreign and television productions, which provided career sustenance through a decade in which many aging screen actors suffered waning careers. He starred in the ABC television series The Smith Family between 1971 and 1972. A TV-movie adaptation of John Steinbeck's novel, 1973's The Red Pony, earned Fonda an Emmy nomination. After the unsuccessful Hollywood melodrama, Ash Wednesday, he filmed three Italian productions released in 1973 and 1974. The most successful of these, My Name Is Nobody, presented Fonda in a rare comedic performance as an old gunslinger whose plans to retire are dampened by a \"fan\" of sorts.\nFonda continued stage acting throughout his last years, including several demanding roles in Broadway plays. He returned to Broadway in 1974 for the biographical drama, Clarence Darrow, for which he was nominated for a Tony Award. Fonda's health had been deteriorating for years, but his first outward symptoms occurred after a performance of the play in April 1974, when he collapsed from exhaustion. After the appearance of a cardiac arrhythmia brought on by prostate cancer, he had a pacemaker installed following cancer surgery. Fonda returned to the play in 1975. After the run of a 1978 play, First Monday of October, he took the advice of his doctors and quit plays, though he continued to star in films and television.\nFonda appeared in a revival of The Time of Your Life that opened on March 17, 1972, at the Huntington Hartford Theater in Los Angeles, where Fonda, Richard Dreyfuss, Gloria Grahame, Ron Thompson, Strother Martin, Jane Alexander, Lewis J. Stadlen, Richard X. Slattery, and Pepper Martin were among the cast with Edwin Sherin directing.[27]\nIn 1976, Fonda appeared in several notable television productions, the first being Collision Course, the story of the volatile relationship between President Harry Truman (E. G. Marshall) and General MacArthur (Fonda), produced by ABC. After an appearance in the acclaimed Showtime broadcast of Almos' a Man, based on a story by Richard Wright, he starred in the epic NBC miniseries Captains and Kings, based on Taylor Caldwell's novel. Three years later, he appeared in ABC's Roots: The Next Generations, but the miniseries was overshadowed by its predecessor, Roots. Also in 1976, Fonda starred in the World War II blockbuster Midway.\nFonda finished the 1970s in a number of disaster films. The first of these was the 1977 Italian killer octopus thriller Tentacles and Rollercoaster, in which Fonda appeared with Richard Widmark and a young Helen Hunt. He performed again with Widmark, Olivia de Havilland, Fred MacMurray, and Jos\u00e9 Ferrer in the killer bee action film The Swarm. He also acted in the global disaster film Meteor (his second role as a sitting President of the United States after Fail-Safe), with Sean Connery, Natalie Wood, and Karl Malden, and the Canadian production City on Fire, which also featured Shelley Winters and Ava Gardner. Fonda had a small role with his son, Peter, in Wanda Nevada (1979), with Brooke Shields.\nAs Fonda's health declined and he took longer breaks between filming, critics began to acknowledge the value of his extensive body of work. In 1979, he received the Golden Plate Award of the American Academy of Achievement. His Golden Plate was presented by Awards Council member Jimmy Stewart.[28] In 1979, he was inducted into the American Theater Hall of Fame for his achievements on Broadway.[29] Lifetime Achievement awards from the Golden Globes and Academy Awards followed in 1980 and 1981, respectively.\nFonda continued to act into the early 1980s, though all but one of the productions in which he was featured before his death were for television. The television works included the live performance of Preston Jones's The Oldest Living Graduate and the Emmy-nominated Gideon's Trumpet (co-starring Fay Wray in her last performance) about Clarence Gideon's fight to have the right to publicly funded legal counsel for the indigent.\n\n Fonda won an Academy Award for his work with Katharine Hepburn in On Golden Pond.\nOn Golden Pond in 1981, the film adaptation of Ernest Thompson's play, marked one final professional and personal triumph for Fonda. Directed by Mark Rydell, the project provided unprecedented collaborations between Fonda and Katharine Hepburn, along with Fonda and his daughter, Jane. The elder Fonda played an emotionally brittle and distant father who becomes more accessible at the end of his life. Jane Fonda has said that elements of the story mimicked their real-life relationship, and helped them resolve certain issues. She bought the film rights in the hope that her father would play the role, and later described it as \"a gift to my father that was so unbelievably successful.\"[30]\nPremiered in December 1981, the film was well received by critics, and after a limited release on December 4, On Golden Pond developed enough of an audience to be widely released on January 22. With 10 Academy Award nominations, the film earned nearly $120\u00a0million at the box office, becoming an unexpected blockbuster. In addition to wins for Hepburn (Best Actress), and Thompson (Screenplay), On Golden Pond brought Fonda his only Oscar - for Best Actor (he was the oldest recipient of the award; it also earned him a Golden Globe Best Actor award). Fonda was by that point too ill to attend the ceremony, and his daughter Jane accepted on his behalf. She said when accepting the award that her dad would probably quip, \"Well, ain't I lucky.\" Years later, Fonda's performance would be remembered as a \"brutally honest portrayal of frightened old age.\"[31]\nFonda's final performance was in the 1981 television drama Summer Solstice[32] with Myrna Loy. It was filmed after On Golden Pond had wrapped and Fonda was in rapidly declining health.\n\nPersonal life[edit]\nMarriages and children[edit]\nFonda was married five times and had three children, one of them adopted. His marriage to Margaret Sullavan in 1931 soon ended in separation, which was finalized in a 1933 divorce.\nIn 1936 he married Frances Ford Seymour Brokaw widow of a wealthy industrialist, George Tuttle Brokaw.[33] The Brokaws had a daughter, Frances de Villiers, nicknamed \"Pan\", who had been born soon after the Brokaws marriage in 1931.[34]\nFonda met his future wife Frances at Denham Studios in England on the set of Wings of the Morning,[35] the first British picture to be filmed in Technicolor. They had two children, Jane (born December 21, 1937) and Peter (February 23, 1940\u2013August 16, 2019), both of whom became successful actors. Jane has won two Best Actress Academy Awards, and Peter was nominated for two Oscars, one for Best Actor.\n\n Fonda with his ]daughter Jane, 1943\nIn August 1949, Fonda announced to Frances that he wanted a divorce so he could remarry; their 13 years of marriage had not been happy ones for him.[36] Devastated by Fonda's confession, and plagued by emotional problems for many years, Frances went into the Austen Riggs Psychiatric Hospital in January 1950 for treatment. She committed suicide there on April 14. Before her death, she had written six notes to various individuals, but left no final message for her husband. Fonda quickly arranged a private funeral with only himself and his mother-in-law, Sophie Seymour, in attendance.[37] Years later, Dr. Margaret Gibson, the psychiatrist who had treated Frances at Austen Riggs, described Henry Fonda as \"a cold, self-absorbed person, a complete narcissist.\"[38]\nLater in 1950, Fonda married Susan Blanchard, his mistress. She was 21 years old, the daughter of Australian-born interior designer Dorothy Hammerstein, and the step-daughter of Oscar Hammerstein II.[39] Together, they adopted a daughter, Amy Fishman (born 1953).[40] They divorced three years later. Blanchard was in awe of Fonda, and she described her role in the marriage as \"a geisha\", doing everything she could to please him, dealing with and solving problems he would not acknowledge.[41]\nIn 1957 Fonda married the Italian baroness Afdera Franchetti.[42] They divorced in 1961. Soon after, in 1965, Fonda married Shirlee Mae Adams (born in 1932), and remained with her until his death in 1982.\nFonda's relationship with his children has been described as \"emotionally distant\". Fonda loathed displays of feeling in himself or others, and this was a consistent part of his character. Whenever he felt that his emotional wall was being breached, he had outbursts of anger, exhibiting a furious temper that terrified his family.[43] In Peter Fonda's 1998 autobiography Don't Tell Dad (1998), he described how he was never sure how his father felt about him. He never volunteered to his father that he loved him until he was elderly, and Peter finally heard, \"I love you, son.\"[44] His daughter Jane rejected her father's friendships with Republican actors such as John Wayne and James Stewart. Their relationship became extremely strained as Jane Fonda became a left-wing activist.\nJane Fonda reported feeling detached from her father, especially during her early acting days. In 1958 she met Lee Strasberg while visiting her father at Malibu. The Fonda and Strasberg families were neighbors, and she had developed a friendship with Strasberg's daughter, Susan. Jane Fonda began studying acting with Strasberg, learning the techniques of \"The Method\" of which Strasberg was a renowned proponent. This proved to be a pivotal point in her career. As Jane Fonda developed her skill as an actress, she became frustrated with her father's talent that, to her, appeared a demonstration of effortless ability.[45]\n\nPolitics[edit]\nFonda was an ardent supporter of the Democratic Party and \"an admirer\" of U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt.[46] In 1960 Fonda appeared in a campaign commercial for presidential candidate John F. Kennedy. The ad focused on Kennedy's naval service during World War II, specifically the famous PT-109 incident.[46] He was initially a registered Republican, but switched parties because the Republican party did not represent his values.[47]\n\nOn acting[edit]\nIn the late 1950s, when Jane Fonda asked her father how he prepared before going on stage, she was baffled by his answer, \"I don't know, I stand there, I think about my wife, Afdera, I don't know.\"\nThe writer Al Aronowitz, while working on a profile of Jane Fonda for The Saturday Evening Post in the 1960s, asked Henry Fonda about method acting: \"I can't articulate about the Method\", he told me, \"because I never studied it. I don't mean to suggest that I have any feelings one way or the other about it...I don't know what the Method is and I don't care what the Method is. Everybody's got a method. Everybody can't articulate about their method, and I can't, if I have a method\u2014and Jane sometimes says that I use the Method, that is, the capital letter Method, without being aware of it. Maybe I do; it doesn't matter.\"[48]\nAronowitz reported Jane saying, \"My father can't articulate the way he works. He just can't do it. He's not even conscious of what he does, and it made him nervous for me to try to articulate what I was trying to do. And I sensed that immediately, so we did very little talking about it...he said, 'Shut up, I don't want to hear about it.' He didn't want me to tell him about it, you know. He wanted to make fun of it.\"[48]\n\nDeath and legacy[edit]\nFonda died at his Los Angeles home on August 12, 1982, from heart disease. Fonda's wife, Shirlee, his daughter Jane, and his son Peter were at his side that day.[49] He suffered from prostate cancer, but this did not directly cause his death and was noted only as a concurrent ailment on his death certificate.\nFonda requested that no funeral be held, and his body was cremated. President Ronald Reagan, a former actor himself, hailed Fonda as \"a true professional dedicated to excellence in his craft. He graced the screen with a sincerity and accuracy which made him a legend.\"[50]\nThe home where Fonda was born in 1905 is preserved at The Stuhr Museum of the Prairie Pioneer in Grand Island, Nebraska.\nFonda is widely recognized as one of the Hollywood greats of the classic era. On the centenary of his birth, May 16, 2005, Turner Classic Movies (TCM) honored Fonda with a marathon of his films. Also in May 2005, the United States Post Office released a 37-cent postage stamp with an artist's drawing of Fonda as part of their \"Hollywood legends\" series.[21] The Fonda Theatre in Hollywood, originally known as the Carter DeHaven Music Box, was named for the actor in 1985 by the Nederlander Organization.\n\nIn popular culture[edit]\nIn Joseph Heller's satirical novel Catch-22, there is a running joke that fictional character Major Major Major Major resembles Henry Fonda. Philip D. Beidler comments that \"one of the novel's great absurd jokes is the character's bewildering resemblance to Henry Fonda\".[51] Taking into account when Catch-22 was written, this most likely refers to Fonda circa about 1955, when he starred in the film Mister Roberts.\n\nFilmography[edit]\nMain article: Henry Fonda filmography\nFrom the beginning of his career in 1935 through his last projects in 1981, Fonda appeared in 106 films, television programs, and shorts. Through the course of his career, he appeared in many films, including such classics as 12 Angry Men and The Ox-Bow Incident. He was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Actor for his role in 1940's The Grapes of Wrath and won for his part in 1981's On Golden Pond. Fonda made his mark in Westerns (which included his most villainous role as Frank in Once Upon a Time in the West) and war films, and made frequent appearances in both television and foreign productions late in his career.\n\nBroadway stage performances[edit]\nThe Game of Love and Death (November 1929 \u2013 January 1930)\nI Loved You, Wednesday (October \u2013 December 1932)\nNew Faces of 1934 (Revue; March \u2013 July 1934)\nThe Farmer Takes a Wife (October 1934 \u2013 January 1935)\nBlow Ye Winds (September \u2013 October 1937)\nBlockade (June 1938)\nMister Roberts (February 1948 \u2013 January 1951)\nPoint of No Return (December 1951 \u2013 November 1952)\nThe Caine Mutiny (January 1954 \u2013 January 1955)\nTwo for the Seesaw (January 1958 \u2013 October 1959)\nSilent Night, Lonely Night (December 1959 \u2013 March 1960)\nCritic's Choice (December 1960 \u2013 May 1961)\nA Gift of Time (February \u2013 May 1962)\nGeneration (October 1965 \u2013 June 1966)\nOur Town (November \u2013 December 1969)\nClarence Darrow (March \u2013 April 1974; March 1975)\nFirst Monday in October (October \u2013 December 1978)\nAwards[edit]\n\n\nAwards\n\nYear\n\nResult\n\nCategory\n\nWork\n\n\nAcademy Awards\n\n1940\n\nNominated\n\nBest Actor\n\nThe Grapes of Wrath\n\n\n1957\n\nNominated\n\nBest Picture\n\n12 Angry Men\n\n\n1980\n\nHonored\n\nAcademy Honorary Award\n\nN/A\n\n\n1981\n\nWon\n\nBest Actor\n\nOn Golden Pond\n\n\nBAFTA Awards\n\n1958\n\nWon\n\nBest Actor\n\n12 Angry Men\n\n\n1981\n\nNominated\n\nBest Actor\n\nOn Golden Pond\n\n\nEmmy Awards (Primetime)\n\n\n1973\n\nNominated\n\nOutstanding Lead Actor in a Limited Series or Movie\n\nThe Red Pony\n\n\n1980\n\nNominated\n\nOutstanding Lead Actor in a Limited Series or Movie\n\nGideon's Trumpet\n\n\nGolden Globe Awards\n\n1958\n\nNominated\n\nBest Actor \u2013 Motion Picture Drama\n\n12 Angry Men\n\n\n1980\n\nHonored\n\nCecil B. DeMille Award\n\nN/A\n\n\n1982\n\nWon\n\nBest Actor \u2013 Motion Picture Drama\n\nOn Golden Pond\n\n\nGrammy Awards\n\n1977\n\nWon\n\nBest Spoken Word Album\n\nGreat American Documents\n\n\nTony Awards\n\n1975\n\nNominated\n\nBest Actor in a Play\n\nClarence Darrow\n\n\n1979\n\nHonored\n\nSpecial Tony Award\n\nN/A\n\n\n1948\n\nWon\n\nBest Actor in a Play\n\nMister Roberts\n\n\nAFI Awards\n\n1978\n\nHonored\n\nLife Achievement Award\n\nN/A\n\n\nReferences[edit]\n\n\n^ Obituary Variety, August 18, 1982.\n\n^ Fischbach, Bob (June 8, 2013). \"The homes where Omaha's stars got their starts\". Omaha World-Herald. Retrieved July 1, 2017.\n\n^ a b c d Bosworth, Patricia, Jane Fonda, The Private Life of a Public Woman, Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2011, p.18.\n\n^ A. Mark Fonda. \"Fonda Genealogy\". fonda.org. Retrieved August 27, 2015.\n\n^ Fonda 1981, p. 21.\n\n^ Kevin Sweeney (1992). Henry Fonda: A Bio-Bibliography. Greenwood Publishing Group. p.\u00a070. ISBN\u00a09780313265716. Fonda reveals his up-to-the-minute thoughts on religion (he's an agnostic),...\n\n^ Fonda 1981, p. 29.\n\n^ \"Biography\". meredy.com. Retrieved July 1, 2017.\n\n^ Fonda 1981, p. 25.\n\n^ Race Riots of 1919 Archived 2007-02-07 at the Wayback Machine, Nebraska Studies, Retrieved on 2007-01-28.\n\n^ Henry Fonda. Archived 2011-06-28 at the Wayback Machine YahooMovies.com. Retrieved on January 11, 2007.\n\n^ The Minnesota Gopher yearbook, 1925, lists Fonda among the fraternity's members on p.450. He is pictured in the 1926 yearbook, p.438, but is no longer listed on the group's roster. (Photography and editing occurred sometimes a year ahead of the class name of the book, so his participation likely spanned 1924-25.)\n\n^ Bain, David Haward (2004). The Old Iron Road: An Epic of Rails, Roads, and the Urge to Go West. New York City: Penguin Books. pp.\u00a065\u20136. ISBN\u00a00-14-303526-6.\n\n^ Fonda 1981, p.30.\n\n^ Houghton 1951: pp. 56-58.\n\n^ See Houghton 1951: p. 58.\n\n^ See Fonda 1981, p.60.\n\n^ See Fonda 1981, p. 95.\n\n^ See Fonda 1981, p.102.\n\n^ Rabin, Kenn. The Grapes of Wrath Archived 2005-05-10 at the Wayback Machine FilmNight.org. Retrieved on January 11, 2007.\n\n^ a b United States Postal Service. Henry Fonda joins U.S. Postal Service Legends of Hollywood Stamp Series. Archived 2005-09-06 at the Wayback Machine Press Release, May 20, 2005, Retrieved on January 11, 2007.\n\n^ Life Goes to a Party. From Life, August 5, 1940, at Tyrone-Power.com. Retrieved on January 11, 2007.\n\n^ Fonda, A. Mark. Fonda Military. Fonda.org, October 23, 2006. Retrieved on January 11, 2007.\n\n^ See Fonda 1981, p.165.\n\n^ See Fonda 1981, p.250.\n\n^ On Our Merry Way. Archived 2005-10-23 at the Wayback Machine  4alfalfa.com. Retrieved on January 11, 2007.\n\n^ \"Hollywood Beat\". The Afro American. April 8, 1972. Retrieved January 22, 2012.\n\n^ \"Golden Plate Awardees of the American Academy of Achievement\". www.achievement.org. American Academy of Achievement.\n\n^ Johnston, Laurie (November 19, 1979). \"Theater Hall of Fame Enshrines 51 Artists\". The New York Times. Retrieved July 1, 2017.\n\n^ Kennedy, Dana (May 6, 2001). \"An Unscripted Life Starring Herself\". The New York Times. Retrieved May 4, 2010.\n\n^ Burr, Ty (August 13, 1993). \"30 outstanding stars\". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved March 31, 2021.\n\n^ \"The New York Times\". The New York Times. Retrieved January 24, 2012.\n\n^ See Bosworth (2011), Jane Fonda, p. 22\n\n^ See Bosworth, Jane Fonda, p. 222\n\n^ See Christopher Andersen (1990) Citizen Jane\n\n^ See Bosworth (2011), Jane Fonda, p. 65\n\n^ See Bosworth (2011), Jane Fonda, p. 69\n\n^ See Bosworth (2011), Jane Fonda, p. 67\n\n^ See Bosworth (2011), Jane Fonda, pp. 63-64\n\n^ \"Amy Fonda 1953 -\". Archived from the original on November 24, 2005. Retrieved July 1, 2017.CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link)  fonda.org, January 16, 2005. Retrieved on January 11, 2007.\n\n^ See Bosworth, Patricia, \"Jane Fonda, The Private Life of a Public Woman,\" Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2011, p. 78\n\n^ Graziano Arici Archives / GA016526: Celebrities from '40's to '70's. Archived 2005-11-03 at the Wayback Machine  Graziano Arici Photographer. Retrieved on January 11, 2007.\n\n^ See Bosworth (2011), Jane Fonda, p. 78\n\n^ Araujo, Djalma. Sermon of September 27, 1998. Archived November 24, 2005, at the Wayback Machine First United Methodist Church of San Diego. Retrieved on January 11, 2007.\n\n^ See Bosworth (2011), Jane Fonda, pp. 107-108\n\n^ a b \"The Living Room Candidate - Commercials - 1960 - Henry Fonda\". livingroomcandidate.org. Retrieved August 27, 2015.\n\n^ https://blog.aarp.org/entertainment/henry-fonda-republican-yes-says-his-son\n\n^ a b http://www.blacklistedjournalist.com/column63j.html\n\n^ Interview with Peter Fonda, NPR's \"Fresh Air.\n\n^ See \"Fonda is cremated, no funeral\", Minden Press-Herald, August 13, 1982, p. 1\n\n^ Beidler 1998, p.\u00a04\u20135. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBeidler1998 (help)\n\n\nBibliography[edit]\nCollier, Peter (1991). The Fondas: A Hollywood Dynasty. Putnam. ISBN\u00a00-399-13592-8.\nFonda, Henry (1982). Fonda: My Life. Fulcrum Publishing. ISBN\u00a00-453-00402-4.\nFonda, Jane (2005). My Life So Far. Random House. ISBN\u00a00-375-50710-8.\nFonda, Peter (1998). Don't Tell Dad. Hyperion. ISBN\u00a00-7868-6111-8.\nHoughton, Norris (1951). But Not Forgotten: The Adventure of the University Players. New York: William Sloane Associates.\nJames, John Douglas (1976). The MGM Story. Crown Publishers. ISBN\u00a00-517-52389-2.\nMcKinney, Devin (2012). The Man Who Saw a Ghost: The Life and Work of Henry Fonda. St. Martin's Press. ISBN\u00a0978-1-250-00841-1.\nRoberts, Allen and Max Goldstein (1984). Henry Fonda: A Biography. McFarland & Co. ISBN\u00a00-89950-114-1.\nSweeney, Kevin (1992). Henry Fonda: A BioBibliography. Greenwood Press. ISBN\u00a00-313-26571-2.\nThomas, Tony (1990). The Films of Henry Fonda. Citadel Press. ISBN\u00a00-8065-1189-3.\nWise, James. Stars in Blue: Movie Actors in America's Sea Services. Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press, 1997. ISBN\u00a01557509379. OCLC\u00a036824724.\nBeidler, Philip D. (1996). \"Mr. Roberts and American Remembering; or, Why Major Major Major Major Looks Like Henry Fonda\". Journal of American Studies. Cambridge University Press. 30: 47\u201364. doi:10.1017/S0021875800024312.\nExternal links[edit]\n\n\n\nWikimedia Commons has media related to Henry Fonda.\n\n\n\n\nWikiquote has quotations related to: Henry Fonda\n\nHenry Fonda at the Internet Broadway Database  Retrieved on 2008-07-26\nHenry Fonda at IMDb Retrieved on 2008-07-26\nHenry Fonda at the TCM Movie Database  Retrieved on 2008-07-26 Retrieved on 2008-07-26\nHenry Fonda as found in the 1910 US Census, 1920 US Census, 1930 US Census, 1931 Maryland Marriages,[dead link] and Social Security Death Index.[dead link]\nLiterature on Henry Fonda\nAwards for Henry Fonda\nvteAcademy Award for Best Actor1928\u20131950\nEmil Jannings (1928)\nWarner Baxter (1929)\nGeorge Arliss (1930)\nLionel Barrymore (1931)\nFredric March / Wallace Beery (1932)\nCharles Laughton (1933)\nClark Gable (1934)\nVictor McLaglen (1935)\nPaul Muni (1936)\nSpencer Tracy (1937)\nSpencer Tracy (1938)\nRobert Donat (1939)\nJames Stewart (1940)\nGary Cooper (1941)\nJames Cagney (1942)\nPaul Lukas (1943)\nBing Crosby (1944)\nRay Milland (1945)\nFredric March (1946)\nRonald Colman (1947)\nLaurence Olivier (1948)\nBroderick Crawford (1949)\nJos\u00e9 Ferrer (1950)\n1951\u20131975\nHumphrey Bogart (1951)\nGary Cooper (1952)\nWilliam Holden (1953)\nMarlon Brando (1954)\nErnest Borgnine (1955)\nYul Brynner (1956)\nAlec Guinness (1957)\nDavid Niven (1958)\nCharlton Heston (1959)\nBurt Lancaster (1960)\nMaximilian Schell (1961)\nGregory Peck (1962)\nSidney Poitier (1963)\nRex Harrison (1964)\nLee Marvin (1965)\nPaul Scofield (1966)\nRod Steiger (1967)\nCliff Robertson (1968)\nJohn Wayne (1969)\nGeorge C. Scott1 (1970)\nGene Hackman (1971)\nMarlon Brando1 (1972)\nJack Lemmon (1973)\nArt Carney (1974)\nJack Nicholson (1975)\n1976\u20132000\nPeter Finch (1976)\nRichard Dreyfuss (1977)\nJon Voight (1978)\nDustin Hoffman (1979)\nRobert De Niro (1980)\nHenry Fonda (1981)\nBen Kingsley (1982)\nRobert Duvall (1983)\nF. Murray Abraham (1984)\nWilliam Hurt (1985)\nPaul Newman (1986)\nMichael Douglas (1987)\nDustin Hoffman (1988)\nDaniel Day-Lewis (1989)\nJeremy Irons (1990)\nAnthony Hopkins (1991)\nAl Pacino (1992)\nTom Hanks (1993)\nTom Hanks (1994)\nNicolas Cage (1995)\nGeoffrey Rush (1996)\nJack Nicholson (1997)\nRoberto Benigni (1998)\nKevin Spacey (1999)\nRussell Crowe (2000)\n2001\u2013present\nDenzel Washington (2001)\nAdrien Brody (2002)\nSean Penn (2003)\nJamie Foxx (2004)\nPhilip Seymour Hoffman (2005)\nForest Whitaker (2006)\nDaniel Day-Lewis (2007)\nSean Penn (2008)\nJeff Bridges (2009)\nColin Firth (2010)\nJean Dujardin (2011)\nDaniel Day-Lewis (2012)\nMatthew McConaughey (2013)\nEddie Redmayne (2014)\nLeonardo DiCaprio (2015)\nCasey Affleck (2016)\nGary Oldman (2017)\nRami Malek (2018)\nJoaquin Phoenix (2019)\n1 refused award that year\nvteAcademy Honorary Award1928\u20131950\nWarner Bros. / Charlie Chaplin (1928)\nWalt Disney (1932)\nShirley Temple (1934)\nD. W. Griffith (1935)\nThe March of Time / W. Howard Greene and Harold Rosson (1936)\nEdgar Bergen / W. Howard Greene / Museum of Modern Art Film Library / Mack Sennett (1937)\nJ. Arthur Ball / Walt Disney / Deanna Durbin and Mickey Rooney / Gordon Jennings, Jan Domela, Devereaux Jennings, Irmin Roberts, Art Smith, Farciot Edouart, Loyal Griggs, Loren L. Ryder, Harry D. Mills, Louis Mesenkop, Walter Oberst / Oliver T. Marsh and Allen Davey / Harry Warner (1938)\nDouglas Fairbanks / Judy Garland / William Cameron Menzies / Motion Picture Relief Fund (Jean Hersholt, Ralph Morgan, Ralph Block, Conrad Nagel)/ Technicolor Company (1939)\nBob Hope / Nathan Levinson (1940)\nWalt Disney, William Garity, John N. A. Hawkins, and the RCA Manufacturing Company / Leopold Stokowski and his associates / Rey Scott / British Ministry of Information (1941)\nCharles Boyer / No\u00ebl Coward / Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer (1942)\nGeorge Pal (1943)\nBob Hope / Margaret O'Brien (1944)\nRepublic Studio, Daniel J. Bloomberg, and the Republic Studio Sound Department / Walter Wanger / The House I Live In / Peggy Ann Garner (1945)\nHarold Russell / Laurence Olivier / Ernst Lubitsch / Claude Jarman Jr. (1946)\nJames Baskett / Thomas Armat, William Nicholas Selig, Albert E. Smith, and George Kirke Spoor / Bill and Coo / Shoeshine (1947)\nWalter Wanger / Monsieur Vincent / Sid Grauman / Adolph Zukor (1948)\nJean Hersholt / Fred Astaire / Cecil B. DeMille / The Bicycle Thief (1949)\nLouis B. Mayer / George Murphy / The Walls of Malapaga (1950)\n1951\u20131975\nGene Kelly / Rashomon (1951)\nMerian C. Cooper / Bob Hope / Harold Lloyd / George Mitchell / Joseph M. Schenck / Forbidden Games (1952)\n20th Century-Fox Film Corporation / Bell & Howell Company / Joseph Breen / Pete Smith (1953)\nBausch & Lomb Optical Company / Danny Kaye / Kemp Niver / Greta Garbo / Jon Whiteley / Vincent Winter / Gate of Hell (1954)\nSamurai I: Musashi Miyamoto (1955)\nEddie Cantor (1956)\nSociety of Motion Picture and Television Engineers / Gilbert M. \"Broncho Billy\" Anderson / Charles Brackett / B. B. Kahane (1957)\nMaurice Chevalier (1958)\nBuster Keaton / Lee de Forest (1959)\nGary Cooper / Stan Laurel / Hayley Mills (1960)\nWilliam L. Hendricks / Fred L. Metzler / Jerome Robbins (1961)\nWilliam J. Tuttle (1964)\nBob Hope (1965)\nYakima Canutt / Y. Frank Freeman (1966)\nArthur Freed (1967)\nJohn Chambers / Onna White (1968)\nCary Grant (1969)\nLillian Gish / Orson Welles (1970)\nCharlie Chaplin (1971)\nCharles S. Boren / Edward G. Robinson (1972)\nHenri Langlois / Groucho Marx (1973)\nHoward Hawks / Jean Renoir (1974)\nMary Pickford (1975)\n1976\u20132000\nMargaret Booth (1977)\nWalter Lantz / Laurence Olivier / King Vidor / Museum of Modern Art Department of Film (1978)\nHal Elias / Alec Guinness (1979)\nHenry Fonda (1980)\nBarbara Stanwyck (1981)\nMickey Rooney (1982)\nHal Roach (1983)\nJames Stewart / National Endowment for the Arts (1984)\nPaul Newman / Alex North (1985)\nRalph Bellamy (1986)\nEastman Kodak Company / National Film Board of Canada (1988)\nAkira Kurosawa (1989)\nSophia Loren / Myrna Loy (1990)\nSatyajit Ray (1991)\nFederico Fellini (1992)\nDeborah Kerr (1993)\nMichelangelo Antonioni (1994)\nKirk Douglas / Chuck Jones (1995)\nMichael Kidd (1996)\nStanley Donen (1997)\nElia Kazan (1998)\nAndrzej Wajda (1999)\nJack Cardiff / Ernest Lehman (2000)\n2001\u2013present\nSidney Poitier / Robert Redford (2001)\nPeter O'Toole (2002)\nBlake Edwards (2003)\nSidney Lumet (2004)\nRobert Altman (2005)\nEnnio Morricone (2006)\nRobert F. Boyle (2007)\nLauren Bacall / Roger Corman / Gordon Willis (2009)\nKevin Brownlow / Jean-Luc Godard / Eli Wallach (2010)\nJames Earl Jones / Dick Smith (2011)\nD. A. Pennebaker / Hal Needham / George Stevens Jr. (2012)\nAngela Lansbury / Steve Martin / Piero Tosi (2013)\nJean-Claude Carri\u00e8re / Hayao Miyazaki / Maureen O'Hara (2014)\nSpike Lee / Gena Rowlands (2015)\nJackie Chan / Lynn Stalmaster / Anne V. Coates / Frederick Wiseman (2016)\nCharles Burnett / Owen Roizman / Donald Sutherland / Agn\u00e8s Varda (2017)\nMarvin Levy / Lalo Schifrin / Cicely Tyson (2018)\nDavid Lynch / Wes Studi / Lina Wertm\u00fcller (2019)\n\nvteAFI Life Achievement Award\nJohn Ford (1973)\nJames Cagney (1974)\nOrson Welles (1975)\nWilliam Wyler (1976)\nBette Davis (1977)\nHenry Fonda (1978)\nAlfred Hitchcock (1979)\nJames Stewart (1980)\nFred Astaire (1981)\nFrank Capra (1982)\nJohn Huston (1983)\nLillian Gish (1984)\nGene Kelly (1985)\nBilly Wilder (1986)\nBarbara Stanwyck (1987)\nJack Lemmon (1988)\nGregory Peck (1989)\nDavid Lean (1990)\nKirk Douglas (1991)\nSidney Poitier (1992)\nElizabeth Taylor (1993)\nJack Nicholson (1994)\nSteven Spielberg (1995)\nClint Eastwood (1996)\nMartin Scorsese (1997)\nRobert Wise (1998)\nDustin Hoffman (1999)\nHarrison Ford (2000)\nBarbra Streisand (2001)\nTom Hanks (2002)\nRobert De Niro (2003)\nMeryl Streep (2004)\nGeorge Lucas (2005)\nSean Connery (2006)\nAl Pacino (2007)\nWarren Beatty (2008)\nMichael Douglas (2009)\nMike Nichols (2010)\nMorgan Freeman (2011)\nShirley MacLaine (2012)\nMel Brooks (2013)\nJane Fonda (2014)\nSteve Martin (2015)\nJohn Williams (2016)\nDiane Keaton (2017)\nGeorge Clooney (2018)\nDenzel Washington (2019)\nJulie Andrews (2020)\n\nvteBAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Leading Role1952\u20131967British\nRalph Richardson (1952)\nJohn Gielgud (1953)\nKenneth More (1954)\nLaurence Olivier (1955)\nPeter Finch (1956)\nAlec Guinness (1957)\nTrevor Howard (1958)\nPeter Sellers (1959)\nPeter Finch (1960)\nPeter Finch (1961)\nPeter O'Toole (1962)\nDirk Bogarde (1963)\nRichard Attenborough (1964)\nDirk Bogarde (1965)\nRichard Burton (1966)\nPaul Scofield (1967)\nForeign\nMarlon Brando (1952)\nMarlon Brando (1953)\nMarlon Brando (1954)\nErnest Borgnine (1955)\nFran\u00e7ois P\u00e9rier (1956)\nHenry Fonda (1957)\nSidney Poitier (1958)\nJack Lemmon (1959)\nJack Lemmon (1960)\nPaul Newman (1961)\nBurt Lancaster (1962)\nMarcello Mastroianni (1963)\nMarcello Mastroianni (1964)\nLee Marvin (1965)\nRod Steiger (1966)\nRod Steiger (1967)\n1968\u2013present\nSpencer Tracy (1968)\nDustin Hoffman (1969)\nRobert Redford (1970)\nPeter Finch (1971)\nGene Hackman (1972)\nWalter Matthau (1973)\nJack Nicholson (1974)\nAl Pacino (1975)\nJack Nicholson (1976)\nPeter Finch (1977)\nRichard Dreyfuss (1978)\nJack Lemmon (1979)\nJohn Hurt (1980)\nBurt Lancaster (1981)\nBen Kingsley (1982)\nMichael Caine / Dustin Hoffman (1983)\nHaing S. Ngor (1984)\nWilliam Hurt (1985)\nBob Hoskins (1986)\nSean Connery (1987)\nJohn Cleese (1988)\nDaniel Day-Lewis (1989)\nPhilippe Noiret (1990)\nAnthony Hopkins (1991)\nRobert Downey Jr. (1992)\nAnthony Hopkins (1993)\nHugh Grant (1994)\nNigel Hawthorne (1995)\nGeoffrey Rush (1996)\nRobert Carlyle (1997)\nRoberto Benigni (1998)\nKevin Spacey (1999)\nJamie Bell (2000)\nRussell Crowe (2001)\nDaniel Day-Lewis (2002)\nBill Murray (2003)\nJamie Foxx (2004)\nPhilip Seymour Hoffman (2005)\nForest Whitaker (2006)\nDaniel Day-Lewis (2007)\nMickey Rourke (2008)\nColin Firth (2009)\nColin Firth (2010)\nJean Dujardin (2011)\nDaniel Day-Lewis (2012)\nChiwetel Ejiofor (2013)\nEddie Redmayne (2014)\nLeonardo DiCaprio (2015)\nCasey Affleck (2016)\nGary Oldman (2017)\nRami Malek (2018)\nJoaquin Phoenix (2019)\n\nvteCecil B. DeMille Award1950s\nCecil B. DeMille (1952)\nWalt Disney (1953)\nDarryl F. Zanuck (1954)\nJean Hersholt (1955)\nJack L. Warner (1956)\nMervyn LeRoy (1957)\nBuddy Adler (1958)\nMaurice Chevalier (1959)\n1960s\nBing Crosby (1960)\nFred Astaire (1961)\nJudy Garland (1962)\nBob Hope (1963)\nJoseph E. Levine (1964)\nJames Stewart (1965)\nJohn Wayne (1966)\nCharlton Heston (1967)\nKirk Douglas (1968)\nGregory Peck (1969)\n1970s\nJoan Crawford (1970)\nFrank Sinatra (1971)\nAlfred Hitchcock (1972)\nSamuel Goldwyn (1973)\nBette Davis (1974)\nHal B. Wallis (1975)\nWalter Mirisch (1977)\nRed Skelton (1978)\nLucille Ball (1979)\n1980s\nHenry Fonda (1980)\nGene Kelly (1981)\nSidney Poitier (1982)\nLaurence Olivier (1983)\nPaul Newman (1984)\nElizabeth Taylor (1985)\nBarbara Stanwyck (1986)\nAnthony Quinn (1987)\nClint Eastwood (1988)\nDoris Day (1989)\n1990s\nAudrey Hepburn (1990)\nJack Lemmon (1991)\nRobert Mitchum (1992)\nLauren Bacall (1993)\nRobert Redford (1994)\nSophia Loren (1995)\nSean Connery (1996)\nDustin Hoffman (1997)\nShirley MacLaine (1998)\nJack Nicholson (1999)\n2000s\nBarbra Streisand (2000)\nAl Pacino (2001)\nHarrison Ford (2002)\nGene Hackman (2003)\nMichael Douglas (2004)\nRobin Williams (2005)\nAnthony Hopkins (2006)\nWarren Beatty (2007)\nSteven Spielberg (2009)\n2010s\nMartin Scorsese (2010)\nRobert De Niro (2011)\nMorgan Freeman (2012)\nJodie Foster (2013)\nWoody Allen (2014)\nGeorge Clooney (2015)\nDenzel Washington (2016)\nMeryl Streep (2017)\nOprah Winfrey (2018)\nJeff Bridges (2019)\n2020s\nTom Hanks (2020)\nJane Fonda (2021)\n\nvteGolden Globe Award for Best Actor \u2013 Motion Picture Drama\nPaul Lukas (1943)\nAlexander Knox (1944)\nRay Milland (1945)\nGregory Peck (1946)\nRonald Colman (1947)\nLaurence Olivier (1948)\nBroderick Crawford (1949)\nJos\u00e9 Ferrer (1950)\nFredric March (1951)\nGary Cooper (1952)\nSpencer Tracy (1953)\nMarlon Brando (1954)\nErnest Borgnine (1955)\nKirk Douglas (1956)\nAlec Guinness (1957)\nDavid Niven (1958)\nAnthony Franciosa (1959)\nBurt Lancaster (1960)\nMaximilian Schell (1961)\nGregory Peck (1962)\nSidney Poitier (1963)\nPeter O'Toole (1964)\nOmar Sharif (1965)\nPaul Scofield (1966)\nRod Steiger (1967)\nPeter O'Toole (1968)\nJohn Wayne (1969)\nGeorge C. Scott (1970)\nGene Hackman (1971)\nMarlon Brando (1972)\nAl Pacino (1973)\nJack Nicholson (1974)\nJack Nicholson (1975)\nPeter Finch (1976)\nRichard Burton (1977)\nJon Voight (1978)\nDustin Hoffman (1979)\nRobert De Niro (1980)\nHenry Fonda (1981)\nBen Kingsley (1982)\nRobert Duvall / Tom Courtenay (1983)\nF. Murray Abraham (1984)\nJon Voight (1985)\nBob Hoskins (1986)\nMichael Douglas (1987)\nDustin Hoffman (1988)\nTom Cruise (1989)\nJeremy Irons (1990)\nNick Nolte (1991)\nAl Pacino (1992)\nTom Hanks (1993)\nTom Hanks (1994)\nNicolas Cage (1995)\nGeoffrey Rush (1996)\nPeter Fonda (1997)\nJim Carrey (1998)\nDenzel Washington (1999)\nTom Hanks (2000)\nRussell Crowe (2001)\nJack Nicholson (2002)\nSean Penn (2003)\nLeonardo DiCaprio (2004)\nPhilip Seymour Hoffman (2005)\nForest Whitaker (2006)\nDaniel Day-Lewis (2007)\nMickey Rourke (2008)\nJeff Bridges (2009)\nColin Firth (2010)\nGeorge Clooney (2011)\nDaniel Day-Lewis (2012)\nMatthew McConaughey (2013)\nEddie Redmayne (2014)\nLeonardo DiCaprio (2015)\nCasey Affleck (2016)\nGary Oldman (2017)\nRami Malek (2018)\nJoaquin Phoenix (2019)\nChadwick Boseman (2020)\n\nvteGrammy Award for Best Spoken Word Album1959\u22121980\nThe Best of the Stan Freberg Shows \u2013 Stan Freberg (1959)\nLincoln Portrait \u2013 Carl Sandburg (1960)\nFDR Speaks \u2013 Robert Bialek (producer) (1961)\nHumor in Music \u2013 Leonard Bernstein (1962)\nThe Story-Teller: A Session with Charles Laughton \u2013 Charles Laughton (1963)\nWho's Afraid of Virginia Woolf? \u2013 Edward Albee (playwright) (1964)\nBBC Tribute to John F. Kennedy \u2013 That Was the Week That Was (1965)\nJohn F. Kennedy: As We Remember Him \u2013 Goddard Lieberson (producer) (1966)\nEdward R. Murrow - A Reporter Remembers, Vol. I: The War Years \u2013 Edward R. Murrow (1967)\nGallant Men \u2013 Everett Dirksen (1968)\nLonesome Cities \u2013 Rod McKuen (1969)\nWe Love You Call Collect \u2013 Art Linkletter & Diane Linkletter (1970)\nWhy I Oppose the War in Vietnam \u2013 Martin Luther King Jr. (1971)\nDesiderata \u2013 Les Crane (1972)\nLenny \u2013 Bruce Botnick (producer) & the Original Broadway Cast (1973)\nJonathan Livingston Seagull \u2013 Richard Harris (1974)\nGood Evening \u2013 Peter Cook and Dudley Moore (1975)\nGive 'em Hell, Harry! \u2013 James Whitmore (1976)\nGreat American Documents \u2013 Henry Fonda, Helen Hayes, James Earl Jones and Orson Welles (1977)\nThe Belle of Amherst \u2013 Julie Harris (1978)\nCitizen Kane (Original Motion Picture Soundtrack) \u2013 Orson Welles (1979)\nAges of Man: Readings from Shakespeare \u2013 John Gielgud (1980)\n1981\u22122000\nGertrude Stein, Gertrude Stein, Gertrude Stein \u2013 Pat Carroll (1981)\nDonovan's Brain \u2013 Orson Welles (1982)\nRaiders of the Lost Ark: The Movie on Record \u2013 Tom Voegeli (producer) and Various Artists (1983)\nLincoln Portrait \u2013 William Warfield (1984)\nThe Words of Gandhi \u2013 Ben Kingsley (1985)\nMa Rainey's Black Bottom \u2013 Mike Berniker (producer) & the Original Broadway Cast (1986)\nInterviews from the Class of '55 Recording Sessions \u2013 Johnny Cash, Jerry Lee Lewis, Chips Moman, Ricky Nelson, Roy Orbison, Carl Perkins and Sam Phillips (1987)\nLake Wobegon Days \u2013 Garrison Keillor (1988)\nSpeech by Rev. Jesse Jackson \u2013 Jesse Jackson (1989)\nIt's Always Something \u2013 Gilda Radner (1990)\nGracie: A Love Story \u2013 George Burns (1991)\nThe Civil War \u2013 Ken Burns (1992)\nWhat You Can Do to Avoid AIDS \u2013 Earvin \"Magic\" Johnson and Robert O'Keefe (1993)\nOn the Pulse of Morning \u2013 Maya Angelou (1994)\nGet in the Van \u2013 Henry Rollins (1995)\nPhenomenal Woman \u2013 Maya Angelou (1996)\nIt Takes a Village \u2013 Hillary Clinton (1997)\nCharles Kuralt's Spring \u2013 Charles Kuralt (1998)\nStill Me \u2013 Christopher Reeve (1999)\nThe Autobiography of Martin Luther King Jr. \u2013 LeVar Burton (2000)\n2001\u22122020\nThe Measure of a Man: A Spiritual Autobiography \u2013 Sidney Poitier, Rick Harris & John Runnette (producers) (2001)\nQ: The Autobiography of Quincy Jones \u2013 Quincy Jones, Jeffrey S. Thomas, Steven Strassman (engineers) and Elisa Shokoff (producer) (2002)\nA Song Flung Up to Heaven \u2013 Maya Angelou and Charles B. Potter (producer) (2003)\nLies and the Lying Liars Who Tell Them \u2013 Al Franken and Paul Ruben (producer) (2004)\nMy Life \u2013 Bill Clinton (2005)\nDreams from My Father \u2013 Barack Obama (2006)\nOur Endangered Values: America's Moral Crisis \u2013 Jimmy Carter / With Ossie and Ruby \u2013 Ossie Davis and Ruby Dee (2007)\nThe Audacity of Hope \u2013 Barack Obama and Jacob Bronstein (producer) (2008)\nAn Inconvenient Truth by Al Gore \u2013 Beau Bridges, Cynthia Nixon and Blair Underwood (2009)\nAlways Looking Up \u2013 Michael J. Fox (2010)\nThe Daily Show with Jon Stewart Presents Earth (The Audiobook) \u2013 Jon Stewart (2011)\nIf You Ask Me (And of Course You Won't) \u2013 Betty White (2012)\nSociety's Child \u2013 Janis Ian (2013)\nAmerica Again: Re-becoming the Greatness We Never Weren't \u2013 Stephen Colbert (2014)\nDiary of a Mad Diva \u2013 Joan Rivers (2015)\nA Full Life: Reflections at 90 \u2013 Jimmy Carter (2016)\nIn Such Good Company: Eleven Years of Laughter, Mayhem, and Fun in the Sandbox \u2013 Carol Burnett (2017)\nThe Princess Diarist \u2013 Carrie Fisher (2018)\nFaith: A Journey for All \u2013 Jimmy Carter (2019)\nBecoming \u2013 Michelle Obama (2020)\n2021\u2212present\nBlowout: Corrupted Democracy, Rogue State Russia, and the Richest, Most Destructive Industry on Earth \u2013 Rachel Maddow (2021)\n\nvteKennedy Center Honorees (1970s)1978\nMarian Anderson\nFred Astaire\nGeorge Balanchine\nRichard Rodgers\nArthur Rubinstein\n1979\nAaron Copland\nElla Fitzgerald\nHenry Fonda\nMartha Graham\nTennessee Williams\n\nComplete list\n1970s\n1980s\n1990s\n2000s\n2010s\n2020s\n\nvteNational Board of Review Award for Best Actor\nRay Milland (1945)\nLaurence Olivier (1946)\nMichael Redgrave (1947)\nWalter Huston (1948)\nRalph Richardson (1949)\nAlec Guinness (1950)\nRichard Basehart (1951)\nRalph Richardson (1952)\nJames Mason (1953)\nBing Crosby (1954)\nErnest Borgnine (1955)\nYul Brynner (1956)\nAlec Guinness (1957)\nSpencer Tracy (1958)\nVictor Sj\u00f6str\u00f6m (1959)\nRobert Mitchum (1960)\nAlbert Finney (1961)\nJason Robards (1962)\nRex Harrison (1963)\nAnthony Quinn (1964)\nLee Marvin (1965)\nPaul Scofield (1966)\nPeter Finch (1967)\nCliff Robertson (1968)\nPeter O'Toole (1969)\nGeorge C. Scott (1970)\nGene Hackman (1971)\nPeter O'Toole (1972)\nAl Pacino / Robert Ryan (1973)\nGene Hackman (1974)\nJack Nicholson (1975)\nDavid Carradine (1976)\nJohn Travolta (1977)\nJon Voight / Laurence Olivier (1978)\nPeter Sellers (1979)\nRobert De Niro (1980)\nHenry Fonda (1981)\nBen Kingsley (1982)\nTom Conti (1983)\nVictor Banerjee (1984)\nWilliam Hurt / Raul Julia (1985)\nPaul Newman (1986)\nMichael Douglas (1987)\nGene Hackman (1988)\nMorgan Freeman (1989)\nRobert De Niro / Robin Williams (1990)\nWarren Beatty (1991)\nJack Lemmon (1992)\nAnthony Hopkins (1993)\nTom Hanks (1994)\nNicolas Cage (1995)\nTom Cruise (1996)\nJack Nicholson (1997)\nIan McKellen (1998)\nRussell Crowe (1999)\nJavier Bardem (2000)\nBilly Bob Thornton (2001)\nCampbell Scott (2002)\nSean Penn (2003)\nJamie Foxx (2004)\nPhilip Seymour Hoffman (2005)\nForest Whitaker (2006)\nGeorge Clooney (2007)\nClint Eastwood (2008)\nGeorge Clooney / Morgan Freeman (2009)\nJesse Eisenberg (2010)\nGeorge Clooney (2011)\nBradley Cooper (2012)\nBruce Dern (2013)\nMichael Keaton / Oscar Isaac (2014)\nMatt Damon (2015)\nCasey Affleck (2016)\nTom Hanks (2017)\nViggo Mortensen (2018)\nAdam Sandler (2019)\nRiz Ahmed (2020)\n\nvteSpecial Tony Award1947\u20131975\nDora Chamberlain / Ira and Rita Katzenberg / Jules Leventhal / Burns Mantle / P. A. MacDonald / Vincent Sardi (1947)\nVera Allen / Paul Beisman / Joe E. Brown / Cast of The Importance of Being Earnest / Robert W. Dowling / Experimental Theatre Inc. / Rosalind Gilder / June Lockhart / Mary Martin / George Pierce / James Whitmore\nNo Award (1949)\nMaurice Evans / Philip Faversham / Brock Pemberton (1950)\nRuth Green (1951)\nCharles Boyer / Judy Garland / Edward Kook (1952)\nDanny Kaye / Beatrice Lillie (1953)\nNo Award (1954)\nProscenium Productions (1955)\nFourth Street Chekov Theatre / City Center / The New York Public Library Theatre Collection / The Shakespearewrights / The Threepenny Opera (1956)\nAmerican Shakespeare Festival / Jean-Louis Barrault / Robert Russell Bennett / William Hammerstein / Joseph Harbuck / Paul Shyre (1957)\nMrs. Martin Beck / New York Shakespeare Festival (1958)\nRussel Crouse and Howard Lindsay / John Gielgud / Cast of La Plume de Ma Tante (1959)\nBurgess Meredith and James Thurber / John D. Rockefeller III (1960)\nDavid Merrick / The Theatre Guild (1961)\nBrooks Atkinson / Richard Rodgers / Franco Zeffirelli (1962)\nAlan Bennett, Peter Cook, Jonathan Miller and Dudley Moore / Irving Berlin / W. McNeil Lowry (1963)\nEva Le Gallienne (1964)\nGilbert Miller / Oliver Smith (1965)\nHelen Menken (1966)\nNo Award (1967)\nAPA-Phoenix Theatre / Pearl Bailey / Carol Channing / Maurice Chevalier / Marlene Dietrich / Audrey Hepburn / David Merrick (1968)\nLeonard Bernstein / Carol Burnett / Rex Harrison / The National Theatre Company of Great Britain / The Negro Ensemble Company (1969)\nNo\u00ebl Coward / Lynn Fontanne and Alfred Lunt / New York Shakespeare Festival / Barbra Streisand (1970)\nIngram Ash / Elliot Norton / Playbill / Roger L. Stevens (1971)\nFiddler on the Roof / Ethel Merman / Richard Rodgers / The Theatre Guild-American Theatre Society (1972)\nThe Actor's Fund of America / John Lindsay / Shubert Organization (1973)\nActors' Equity Association / A Moon for the Misbegotten / Candide / Peter Cook and Dudley Moore / Harold Friedlander / Bette Midler / Liza Minnelli / The Theatre Development Fund / John F. Wharton (1974)\nAl Hirschfeld (1975)\n1976\u20132000\nGeorge Abbott / Richard Burton / Circle in the Square / Thomas H. Fitzgerald / Mathilde Pincus (1976)\nCheryl Crawford / Equity Liberty Theatre / Barry Manilow / National Theatre of the Deaf / Diana Ross / Lily Tomlin (1977)\nIrving Berlin / Stan Dragoti and Charles Moss (1978)\nWalter F. Diehl / Eugene O'Neill Memorial Theater Center / Henry Fonda / Richard Rodgers (1979)\nRichard Fitzgerald / Helen Hayes / Mary Tyler Moore / Hobe Morrison (1980)\nLena Horne (1981)\nRadio City Music Hall / The Actors' Fund of America / Warner Communications (1982)\nNo Award (1983)\nA Chorus Line / Peter Feller / La Tragedie de Carmen (1984)\nYul Brynner / New York State Council on the Arts (1985)\nNo Award (1986)\nGeorge Abbott / Jackie Mason (1987)\nBrooklyn Academy of Music (1988)\nNo Award (1989)\nNo Award (1990\u20131992)\nOklahoma! (1993)\nHume Cronyn and Jessica Tandy (1994)\nCarol Channing / National Endowment for the Arts / Harvey Sabinson (1995)\nNo Award (1996)\nBernard B. Jacobs (1997)\nEdward E. Colton / Ben Edwards (1998)\nUta Hagen / Arthur Miller / Isabelle Stevenson (1999)\nDame Edna: The Royal Tour / T. Edward Hambleton (2000)\n2001\u2013present\nPaul Gemignani (2001)\nJulie Harris / Robert Whitehead (2002)\nCy Feuer / Russell Simmons' Def Poetry Jam on Broadway (2003)\nJames M. Nederlander (2004)\nEdward Albee (2005)\nSarah Jones / Harold Prince (2006)\nNo Award (2007)\nRobert Russell Bennett / Stephen Sondheim (2008)\nJerry Herman (2009)\nAlan Ayckbourn / Marian Seldes (2010)\nAthol Fugard / Philip J. Smith (2011)\nActors' Equity Association / Hugh Jackman (2012)\nBernard Gersten / Ming Cho Lee / Paul Libin (2013)\nJane Greenwood (2014)\nJohn Cameron Mitchell / Tommy Tune (2015)\nSheldon Harnick / Marshall W. Mason / National Endowment for the Arts / Miles Wilkin (2016)\nJames Earl Jones (2017)\nJohn Leguizamo / Andrew Lloyd Webber / Chita Rivera / Bruce Springsteen (2018)\nRosemary Harris / Marin Mazzie / Terrence McNally / Sonny Tilders and Creature Technology Company / Jason Michael Webb / Harold Wheeler (2019)\n\nvteTony Award for Best Performance by a Leading Actor in a Play\nJos\u00e9 Ferrer / Fredric March (1947)\nHenry Fonda / Paul Kelly / Basil Rathbone (1948)\nRex Harrison (1949)\nSidney Blackmer (1950)\nClaude Rains (1951)\nJos\u00e9 Ferrer (1952)\nTom Ewell (1953)\nDavid Wayne (1954)\nAlfred Lunt (1955)\nPaul Muni (1956)\nFredric March (1957)\nRalph Bellamy (1958)\nJason Robards Jr. (1959)\nMelvyn Douglas (1960)\nZero Mostel (1961)\nPaul Scofield (1962)\nArthur Hill (1963)\nAlec Guinness (1964)\nWalter Matthau (1965)\nHal Holbrook (1966)\nPaul Rogers (1967)\nMartin Balsam (1968)\nJames Earl Jones (1969)\nFritz Weaver (1970)\nBrian Bedford (1971)\nCliff Gorman (1972)\nAlan Bates (1973)\nMichael Moriarty (1974)\nJohn Kani and Winston Ntshona (1975)\nJohn Wood (1976)\nAl Pacino (1977)\nBarnard Hughes (1978)\nTom Conti (1979)\nJohn Rubinstein (1980)\nIan McKellen (1981)\nRoger Rees (1982)\nHarvey Fierstein (1983)\nJeremy Irons (1984)\nDerek Jacobi (1985)\nJudd Hirsch (1986)\nJames Earl Jones (1987)\nRon Silver (1988)\nPhilip Bosco (1989)\nRobert Morse (1990)\nNigel Hawthorne (1991)\nJudd Hirsch (1992)\nRon Leibman (1993)\nStephen Spinella (1994)\nRalph Fiennes (1995)\nGeorge Grizzard (1996)\nChristopher Plummer (1997)\nAnthony LaPaglia (1998)\nBrian Dennehy (1999)\nStephen Dillane (2000)\nRichard Easton (2001)\nAlan Bates (2002)\nBrian Dennehy (2003)\nJefferson Mays (2004)\nBill Irwin (2005)\nRichard Griffiths (2006)\nFrank Langella (2007)\nMark Rylance (2008)\nGeoffrey Rush (2009)\nDenzel Washington (2010)\nMark Rylance (2011)\nJames Corden (2012)\nTracy Letts (2013)\nBryan Cranston (2014)\nAlex Sharp (2015)\nFrank Langella (2016)\nKevin Kline (2017)\nAndrew Garfield (2018)\nBryan Cranston (2019)\n\nBiography portalNew York City portalLos Angeles portalCalifornia portalFilm portalTheatre portalTelevision portalWorld War II portal\nAuthority control \nBNE: XX958957\nBNF: cb12606221f (data)\nCANTIC: a10297558\nGND: 11853422X\nISNI: 0000 0001 2096 8690\nLCCN: n81066419\nMBA: 284f1144-4901-464e-a081-591c57c332ee\nNARA: 10568571\nNDL: 00620671\nNKC: jn20000700545\nNLA: 35170225\nNLK: KAC2018M2140\nNTA: 069980071\nPLWABN: 9810628303705606\nSELIBR: 393231\nSNAC: w6nk3j44\nSUDOC: 027644111\nTrove: 850468\nVIAF: 112378001\n WorldCat Identities: lccn-n81066419\n\n\n\n\n", "Henry": 0.0014580295771714226, "Jaynes": 0.0006248698187877526, "Fonda": 0.025411372630701937, "May": 0.0008331597583836701, "August": 0.0008331597583836701, "was": 0.014996875650906061, "an": 0.0047906686107061025, "American": 0.0012497396375755051, "film": 0.006040408248281608, "and": 0.02686940220787336, "stage": 0.002082899395959175, "actor": 0.0010414496979795876, "who": 0.0033326390335346803, "had": 0.005623828369089773, "a": 0.02457821287231827, "career": 0.003124349093938763, "that": 0.006248698187877526, "spanned": 0.00020828993959591752, "five": 0.00041657987919183504, "decades": 0.00020828993959591752, "in": 0.03520099979171006, "Hollywood": 0.002082899395959175, "cultivated": 0.00020828993959591752, "strong": 0.00041657987919183504, "appealing": 0.00020828993959591752, "screen": 0.0010414496979795876, "image": 0.00020828993959591752, "several": 0.0006248698187877526, "films": 0.003124349093938763, "now": 0.0006248698187877526, "considered": 0.00041657987919183504, "to": 0.017288064986461155, "be": 0.002082899395959175, "classics": 0.00041657987919183504, "earning": 0.00020828993959591752, "one": 0.0022911893355550927, "Academy": 0.0024994792751510102, "Award": 0.002082899395959175, "for": 0.010206207040199958, "Best": 0.002082899395959175, "Actor": 0.0016663195167673402, "on": 0.0083315975838367, "two": 0.0018746094563632577, "nominations": 0.0006248698187877526, "made": 0.0014580295771714226, "his": 0.017288064986461155, "mark": 0.00041657987919183504, "early": 0.0008331597583836701, "as": 0.009997917100604041, "Broadway": 0.0014580295771714226, "debut": 0.00041657987919183504, "His": 0.0014580295771714226, "began": 0.0006248698187877526, "gain": 0.00020828993959591752, "momentum": 0.00020828993959591752, "with": 0.010831076858987711, "roles": 0.0010414496979795876, "such": 0.0014580295771714226, "Bette": 0.00041657987919183504, "Daviss": 0.00020828993959591752, "fianc\u00e9e": 0.00020828993959591752, "her": 0.0037492189127265154, "Awardwinning": 0.00020828993959591752, "performance": 0.002082899395959175, "Jezebel": 0.00041657987919183504, "brother": 0.00020828993959591752, "Frank": 0.0010414496979795876, "Jesse": 0.00041657987919183504, "James": 0.0018746094563632577, "the": 0.04603207665069777, "future": 0.0006248698187877526, "President": 0.0012497396375755051, "Young": 0.00041657987919183504, "Mr": 0.0008331597583836701, "Lincoln": 0.00041657987919183504, "directed": 0.0012497396375755051, "by": 0.006873568006665278, "John": 0.0024994792751510102, "Ford": 0.0024994792751510102, "peaked": 0.00020828993959591752, "Awardnominated": 0.00020828993959591752, "Tom": 0.00041657987919183504, "Joad": 0.00041657987919183504, "The": 0.010831076858987711, "Grapes": 0.0006248698187877526, "of": 0.027077692147469277, "Wrath": 0.0006248698187877526, "about": 0.003540928973130598, "Oklahoma": 0.00020828993959591752, "family": 0.0018746094563632577, "moved": 0.0006248698187877526, "California": 0.00020828993959591752, "during": 0.0016663195167673402, "Dust": 0.00020828993959591752, "Bowl": 0.00020828993959591752, "s": 0.003540928973130598, "This": 0.0008331597583836701, "is": 0.002082899395959175, "widely": 0.0006248698187877526, "among": 0.0006248698187877526, "greatest": 0.00020828993959591752, "based": 0.0012497396375755051, "novel": 0.0012497396375755051, "same": 0.0006248698187877526, "Nobel": 0.00020828993959591752, "laureate": 0.00020828993959591752, "literature": 0.00020828993959591752, "Steinbeck": 0.00020828993959591752, "In": 0.005207248489897938, "he": 0.013330556134138721, "starred": 0.003540928973130598, "opposite": 0.0010414496979795876, "Barbara": 0.00041657987919183504, "Stanwyck": 0.00041657987919183504, "screwball": 0.00041657987919183504, "comedy": 0.0008331597583836701, "classic": 0.00041657987919183504, "Lady": 0.00041657987919183504, "Eve": 0.00041657987919183504, "Bookending": 0.00020828993959591752, "service": 0.00041657987919183504, "WWII": 0.00041657987919183504, "were": 0.0022911893355550927, "starring": 0.00020828993959591752, "highly": 0.00041657987919183504, "regarded": 0.00041657987919183504, "westerns": 0.00041657987919183504, "OxBow": 0.0006248698187877526, "Incident": 0.0006248698187877526, "My": 0.0010414496979795876, "Darling": 0.00041657987919183504, "Clementine": 0.00041657987919183504, "latter": 0.00041657987919183504, "also": 0.003124349093938763, "Fords": 0.0006248698187877526, "western": 0.0010414496979795876, "Fort": 0.00041657987919183504, "Apache": 0.00041657987919183504, "After": 0.0022911893355550927, "sevenyear": 0.00041657987919183504, "break": 0.0006248698187877526, "from": 0.003540928973130598, "which": 0.005207248489897938, "focused": 0.00041657987919183504, "productions": 0.0014580295771714226, "returned": 0.0014580295771714226, "warboat": 0.00020828993959591752, "ensemble": 0.00020828993959591752, "Mister": 0.0010414496979795876, "Roberts": 0.0016663195167673402, "at": 0.0037492189127265154, "age": 0.0006248698187877526, "fiftyone": 0.00020828993959591752, "played": 0.0027077692147469278, "title": 0.0006248698187877526, "role": 0.0043740887315142675, "thirtyeightyearold": 0.00020828993959591752, "Manny": 0.00020828993959591752, "Balestrero": 0.00020828993959591752, "Alfred": 0.00041657987919183504, "Hitchcocks": 0.00020828993959591752, "thriller": 0.00041657987919183504, "Wrong": 0.00041657987919183504, "Man": 0.0010414496979795876, "Juror": 0.00041657987919183504, "No": 0.0006248698187877526, "holdout": 0.00020828993959591752, "juror": 0.00020828993959591752, "Angry": 0.0006248698187877526, "Men": 0.0006248698187877526, "coproducer": 0.00041657987919183504, "this": 0.0010414496979795876, "won": 0.0012497396375755051, "BAFTA": 0.00041657987919183504, "award": 0.0008331597583836701, "Foreign": 0.00020828993959591752, "Later": 0.0006248698187877526, "into": 0.0012497396375755051, "darker": 0.00020828993959591752, "villain": 0.00041657987919183504, "epic": 0.0006248698187877526, "Once": 0.0008331597583836701, "Upon": 0.0006248698187877526, "Time": 0.0008331597583836701, "West": 0.0008331597583836701, "underrated": 0.00020828993959591752, "box": 0.00041657987919183504, "office": 0.00041657987919183504, "disappointment": 0.00020828993959591752, "its": 0.00041657987919183504, "time": 0.00041657987919183504, "release": 0.00041657987919183504, "but": 0.003124349093938763, "best": 0.00020828993959591752, "all": 0.00041657987919183504, "He": 0.006248698187877526, "lighterhearted": 0.00020828993959591752, "fare": 0.00020828993959591752, "Yours": 0.00020828993959591752, "Mine": 0.00020828993959591752, "Ours": 0.00020828993959591752, "Lucille": 0.00020828993959591752, "Ball": 0.00020828993959591752, "often": 0.00020828993959591752, "important": 0.00020828993959591752, "military": 0.00020828993959591752, "figures": 0.00020828993959591752, "colonel": 0.00041657987919183504, "Battle": 0.00041657987919183504, "Bulge": 0.00041657987919183504, "Admiral": 0.00020828993959591752, "Nimitz": 0.00020828993959591752, "Midway": 0.00041657987919183504, "th": 0.0006248698187877526, "Awards": 0.0008331597583836701, "final": 0.0008331597583836701, "On": 0.0018746094563632577, "Golden": 0.0022911893355550927, "Pond": 0.0012497396375755051, "Katharine": 0.00041657987919183504, "Hepburn": 0.0008331597583836701, "daughter": 0.002082899395959175, "Jane": 0.0037492189127265154, "too": 0.00041657987919183504, "ill": 0.00041657987919183504, "attend": 0.00041657987919183504, "ceremony": 0.00041657987919183504, "died": 0.00041657987919183504, "heart": 0.00041657987919183504, "disease": 0.00041657987919183504, "few": 0.00041657987919183504, "months": 0.00041657987919183504, "later": 0.002082899395959175, "patriarch": 0.00020828993959591752, "famous": 0.00041657987919183504, "actors": 0.0008331597583836701, "including": 0.0010414496979795876, "son": 0.0010414496979795876, "Peter": 0.0016663195167673402, "granddaughter": 0.00020828993959591752, "Bridget": 0.00020828993959591752, "grandson": 0.00020828993959591752, "Troy": 0.00020828993959591752, "Garity": 0.00020828993959591752, "close": 0.00041657987919183504, "friends": 0.00041657987919183504, "called": 0.00041657987919183504, "him": 0.00416579879191835, "Hank": 0.00041657987919183504, "named": 0.00041657987919183504, "sixthGreatest": 0.00020828993959591752, "Male": 0.00020828993959591752, "Screen": 0.00020828993959591752, "Legends": 0.00020828993959591752, "Classic": 0.00041657987919183504, "Era": 0.00020828993959591752, "stars": 0.00041657987919183504, "Film": 0.00020828993959591752, "Institute": 0.00020828993959591752, "Born": 0.00020828993959591752, "Grand": 0.0006248698187877526, "Island": 0.0006248698187877526, "Nebraska": 0.0008331597583836701, "printer": 0.00020828993959591752, "William": 0.0006248698187877526, "Brace": 0.00020828993959591752, "wife": 0.0012497396375755051, "Herberta": 0.00020828993959591752, "Omaha": 0.0006248698187877526, "Fondas": 0.003124349093938763, "patriline": 0.00020828993959591752, "originates": 0.00020828993959591752, "ancestor": 0.00020828993959591752, "Genoa": 0.00020828993959591752, "Italy": 0.00041657987919183504, "migrated": 0.00020828993959591752, "Netherlands": 0.00020828993959591752, "century": 0.00020828993959591752, "branch": 0.00020828993959591752, "immigrated": 0.00020828993959591752, "Dutch": 0.00041657987919183504, "colony": 0.00020828993959591752, "New": 0.0012497396375755051, "Netherland": 0.00020828993959591752, "East": 0.00020828993959591752, "Coast": 0.00020828993959591752, "North": 0.00020828993959591752, "America": 0.00041657987919183504, "They": 0.0014580295771714226, "first": 0.0027077692147469278, "population": 0.00020828993959591752, "settle": 0.00020828993959591752, "what": 0.0010414496979795876, "upstate": 0.00020828993959591752, "York": 0.0010414496979795876, "establishing": 0.00020828993959591752, "town": 0.00041657987919183504, "By": 0.00041657987919183504, "many": 0.0012497396375755051, "their": 0.002082899395959175, "descendants": 0.00020828993959591752, "relocated": 0.00020828993959591752, "brought": 0.0006248698187877526, "up": 0.0006248698187877526, "Christian": 0.00020828993959591752, "Scientist": 0.00020828993959591752, "though": 0.0008331597583836701, "baptized": 0.00020828993959591752, "Episcopalian": 0.00020828993959591752, "St": 0.00020828993959591752, "Stephens": 0.00020828993959591752, "Episcopal": 0.00020828993959591752, "Churchcitation": 0.00020828993959591752, "needed": 0.00020828993959591752, "said": 0.0008331597583836701, "whole": 0.00020828993959591752, "damn": 0.00020828993959591752, "nice": 0.00020828993959591752, "supportive": 0.00020828993959591752, "especially": 0.00041657987919183504, "health": 0.0008331597583836701, "matters": 0.00020828993959591752, "they": 0.0018746094563632577, "avoided": 0.00041657987919183504, "doctors": 0.00041657987919183504, "due": 0.00020828993959591752, "religion": 0.00020828993959591752, "Despite": 0.00041657987919183504, "having": 0.00020828993959591752, "religious": 0.00020828993959591752, "background": 0.00020828993959591752, "became": 0.0016663195167673402, "agnostic": 0.00020828993959591752, "bashful": 0.00020828993959591752, "short": 0.00041657987919183504, "boy": 0.00020828993959591752, "tended": 0.00020828993959591752, "avoid": 0.00020828993959591752, "girls": 0.00020828993959591752, "except": 0.00020828993959591752, "sisters": 0.00020828993959591752, "good": 0.00020828993959591752, "skater": 0.00020828993959591752, "swimmer": 0.00020828993959591752, "runner": 0.00020828993959591752, "worked": 0.0008331597583836701, "parttime": 0.00020828993959591752, "fathers": 0.0006248698187877526, "print": 0.00020828993959591752, "plant": 0.00020828993959591752, "imagined": 0.00020828993959591752, "possible": 0.00020828993959591752, "journalist": 0.00020828993959591752, "after": 0.0027077692147469278, "school": 0.00041657987919183504, "phone": 0.00020828993959591752, "company": 0.0006248698187877526, "enjoyed": 0.00041657987919183504, "drawing": 0.00041657987919183504, "active": 0.00020828993959591752, "Boy": 0.00020828993959591752, "Scouts": 0.00020828993959591752, "Teichmann": 0.00020828993959591752, "reports": 0.00020828993959591752, "reached": 0.00020828993959591752, "rank": 0.00020828993959591752, "Eagle": 0.00020828993959591752, "Scout": 0.00020828993959591752, "However": 0.00020828993959591752, "denied": 0.00020828993959591752, "elsewhere": 0.00020828993959591752, "When": 0.00041657987919183504, "father": 0.002082899395959175, "took": 0.0014580295771714226, "observe": 0.00020828993959591752, "brutal": 0.00020828993959591752, "lynching": 0.00020828993959591752, "Will": 0.00020828993959591752, "Brown": 0.00020828993959591752, "race": 0.00020828993959591752, "riot": 0.00020828993959591752, "enraged": 0.00020828993959591752, "young": 0.0008331597583836701, "kept": 0.00041657987919183504, "keen": 0.00020828993959591752, "awareness": 0.00020828993959591752, "prejudice": 0.00020828993959591752, "rest": 0.00020828993959591752, "life": 0.0008331597583836701, "senior": 0.00020828993959591752, "year": 0.00041657987919183504, "high": 0.00020828993959591752, "grown": 0.00020828993959591752, "more": 0.0006248698187877526, "than": 0.00041657987919183504, "six": 0.00041657987919183504, "feet": 0.00020828993959591752, "m": 0.00020828993959591752, "tall": 0.00020828993959591752, "remained": 0.00041657987919183504, "shy": 0.00020828993959591752, "attended": 0.00041657987919183504, "University": 0.00041657987919183504, "Minnesota": 0.00041657987919183504, "where": 0.0012497396375755051, "majored": 0.00020828993959591752, "journalism": 0.00020828993959591752, "did": 0.0010414496979795876, "not": 0.0012497396375755051, "graduate": 0.00020828993959591752, "While": 0.00041657987919183504, "member": 0.0006248698187877526, "Chi": 0.00041657987919183504, "Delta": 0.00041657987919183504, "Xi": 0.00020828993959591752, "fraternity": 0.00020828993959591752, "Phis": 0.00020828993959591752, "Gamma": 0.00020828993959591752, "chapter": 0.00020828993959591752, "campus": 0.00020828993959591752, "job": 0.00041657987919183504, "Retail": 0.00020828993959591752, "Credit": 0.00020828993959591752, "Company": 0.00020828993959591752, "At": 0.00020828993959591752, "started": 0.00020828993959591752, "acting": 0.0018746094563632577, "Community": 0.00020828993959591752, "Playhouse": 0.00041657987919183504, "when": 0.0016663195167673402, "mothers": 0.00020828993959591752, "friend": 0.00041657987919183504, "Dodie": 0.00020828993959591752, "Brando": 0.00041657987919183504, "mother": 0.00020828993959591752, "Marlon": 0.00020828993959591752, "recommended": 0.00020828993959591752, "try": 0.00041657987919183504, "out": 0.00041657987919183504, "juvenile": 0.00020828993959591752, "part": 0.0014580295771714226, "You": 0.00041657987919183504, "I": 0.0043740887315142675, "cast": 0.0008331597583836701, "Ricky": 0.00020828993959591752, "fascinated": 0.00020828993959591752, "learning": 0.00041657987919183504, "everything": 0.00041657987919183504, "set": 0.0006248698187877526, "construction": 0.00020828993959591752, "production": 0.0018746094563632577, "embarrassed": 0.00020828993959591752, "ability": 0.00041657987919183504, "received": 0.0008331597583836701, "lead": 0.0006248698187877526, "Merton": 0.00020828993959591752, "Movies": 0.00041657987919183504, "realized": 0.00020828993959591752, "beauty": 0.00020828993959591752, "profession": 0.00020828993959591752, "it": 0.0029160591543428453, "allowed": 0.00020828993959591752, "deflect": 0.00020828993959591752, "attention": 0.00020828993959591752, "own": 0.00041657987919183504, "tonguetied": 0.00020828993959591752, "personality": 0.00041657987919183504, "create": 0.00020828993959591752, "characters": 0.00041657987919183504, "relying": 0.00020828993959591752, "someone": 0.00020828993959591752, "elses": 0.00020828993959591752, "scripted": 0.00020828993959591752, "words": 0.00020828993959591752, "decided": 0.00020828993959591752, "quit": 0.00041657987919183504, "go": 0.00020828993959591752, "east": 0.00020828993959591752, "seek": 0.00020828993959591752, "fortune": 0.00020828993959591752, "arrived": 0.00020828993959591752, "Cape": 0.00041657987919183504, "Cod": 0.00020828993959591752, "minor": 0.00020828993959591752, "Dennis": 0.00020828993959591752, "Massachusetts": 0.00020828993959591752, "A": 0.0008331597583836701, "Falmouth": 0.00020828993959591752, "MA": 0.00020828993959591752, "joined": 0.00041657987919183504, "quickly": 0.00041657987919183504, "valued": 0.00020828993959591752, "Players": 0.0006248698187877526, "intercollegiate": 0.00020828993959591752, "summer": 0.00020828993959591752, "stock": 0.00020828993959591752, "There": 0.00041657987919183504, "Margaret": 0.0010414496979795876, "Sullavan": 0.0008331597583836701, "Stewart": 0.0022911893355550927, "left": 0.0006248698187877526, "soon": 0.0008331597583836701, "become": 0.00020828993959591752, "lifelong": 0.00020828993959591752, "end": 0.00041657987919183504, "season": 0.00020828993959591752, "appearing": 0.00020828993959591752, "professional": 0.0006248698187877526, "Jest": 0.00041657987919183504, "Sem": 0.00020828993959591752, "Benelli": 0.00020828993959591752, "Joshua": 0.00041657987919183504, "Logan": 0.0006248698187877526, "sophomore": 0.00020828993959591752, "Princeton": 0.00020828993959591752, "been": 0.0010414496979795876, "doublecast": 0.00020828993959591752, "show": 0.00020828993959591752, "gave": 0.00020828993959591752, "Tornaquinci": 0.00020828993959591752, "elderly": 0.00041657987919183504, "Italian": 0.0008331597583836701, "man": 0.0008331597583836701, "long": 0.00041657987919183504, "white": 0.00020828993959591752, "beard": 0.00020828993959591752, "even": 0.00041657987919183504, "longer": 0.00041657987919183504, "hair": 0.00020828993959591752, "Also": 0.0006248698187877526, "Bretaigne": 0.00020828993959591752, "Windust": 0.00020828993959591752, "Kent": 0.00020828993959591752, "Smith": 0.00041657987919183504, "Eleanor": 0.00020828993959591752, "Phelps": 0.00020828993959591752, "Soon": 0.00041657987919183504, "headed": 0.00020828993959591752, "City": 0.00041657987919183504, "then": 0.00041657987919183504, "marriage": 0.0010414496979795876, "brief": 0.00041657987919183504, "came": 0.00041657987919183504, "luck": 0.00020828993959591752, "changed": 0.00020828993959591752, "Getting": 0.00020828993959591752, "contact": 0.00041657987919183504, "information": 0.00020828993959591752, "Jimmy": 0.0006248698187877526, "these": 0.0006248698187877526, "small": 0.00041657987919183504, "boys": 0.00020828993959591752, "found": 0.00020828993959591752, "lot": 0.00020828993959591752, "common": 0.00020828993959591752, "didnt": 0.00041657987919183504, "discuss": 0.00020828993959591752, "politics": 0.0008331597583836701, "men": 0.00041657987919183504, "roommates": 0.00020828993959591752, "honed": 0.00020828993959591752, "skills": 0.00020828993959591752, "appeared": 0.0029160591543428453, "theatrical": 0.00020828993959591752, "fared": 0.00020828993959591752, "no": 0.0006248698187877526, "better": 0.00020828993959591752, "Americans": 0.00020828993959591752, "work": 0.0012497396375755051, "Great": 0.00041657987919183504, "Depression": 0.00041657987919183504, "sometimes": 0.00041657987919183504, "lacking": 0.00020828993959591752, "enough": 0.00041657987919183504, "money": 0.00020828993959591752, "take": 0.00041657987919183504, "subway": 0.00020828993959591752, "got": 0.0006248698187877526, "hired": 0.00020828993959591752, "Janet": 0.00020828993959591752, "Gaynors": 0.00020828993959591752, "leading": 0.00020828993959591752, "Century": 0.00020828993959591752, "Foxs": 0.00020828993959591752, "adaptation": 0.0006248698187877526, "Farmer": 0.00020828993959591752, "Takes": 0.00020828993959591752, "Wife": 0.00020828993959591752, "reprised": 0.00020828993959591752, "gained": 0.00020828993959591752, "recognition": 0.00041657987919183504, "Suddenly": 0.00020828993959591752, "making": 0.00020828993959591752, "week": 0.00020828993959591752, "dining": 0.00020828993959591752, "Carole": 0.00020828993959591752, "Lombard": 0.00020828993959591752, "followed": 0.0008331597583836701, "roomed": 0.00020828993959591752, "together": 0.0006248698187877526, "again": 0.0012497396375755051, "lodgings": 0.00020828993959591752, "next": 0.00041657987919183504, "door": 0.00020828993959591752, "Greta": 0.00020828993959591752, "Garbo": 0.00020828993959591752, "RKO": 0.00020828993959591752, "Dream": 0.00020828993959591752, "Too": 0.00041657987919183504, "Much": 0.00020828993959591752, "opera": 0.00020828993959591752, "star": 0.00041657987919183504, "Lily": 0.00020828993959591752, "Pons": 0.00020828993959591752, "Times": 0.00020828993959591752, "announced": 0.00041657987919183504, "most": 0.0010414496979795876, "likable": 0.00020828993959591752, "new": 0.00041657987919183504, "crop": 0.00020828993959591752, "romantic": 0.00020828993959591752, "juvenilesFondas": 0.00020828993959591752, "blossomed": 0.00020828993959591752, "costarred": 0.00041657987919183504, "Sylvia": 0.00020828993959591752, "Sidney": 0.0006248698187877526, "Fred": 0.0006248698187877526, "MacMurray": 0.0006248698187877526, "Trail": 0.00020828993959591752, "Lonesome": 0.00020828993959591752, "Pine": 0.00020828993959591752, "Technicolor": 0.00041657987919183504, "movie": 0.0006248698187877526, "filmed": 0.0010414496979795876, "outdoors": 0.00020828993959591752, "exwife": 0.00020828993959591752, "Moons": 0.00020828993959591752, "Our": 0.0006248698187877526, "Home": 0.00020828993959591752, "rekindling": 0.00020828993959591752, "relationship": 0.0012497396375755051, "led": 0.00041657987919183504, "temporary": 0.00020828993959591752, "consideration": 0.00020828993959591752, "remarriage": 0.00020828993959591752, "nod": 0.00020828993959591752, "Only": 0.00020828993959591752, "Live": 0.00020828993959591752, "costarring": 0.00041657987919183504, "Fritz": 0.00041657987919183504, "Lang": 0.00020828993959591752, "Davis": 0.00020828993959591752, "picked": 0.00020828993959591752, "collaboration": 0.00020828993959591752, "director": 0.0008331597583836701, "Another": 0.00020828993959591752, "Drums": 0.00020828993959591752, "Along": 0.00020828993959591752, "Mohawk": 0.00020828993959591752, "successes": 0.00020828993959591752, "recruit": 0.00020828993959591752, "play": 0.0012497396375755051, "version": 0.0006248698187877526, "Steinbecks": 0.00041657987919183504, "reluctant": 0.00020828993959591752, "Darryl": 0.00020828993959591752, "Zanuck": 0.00020828993959591752, "preferred": 0.00041657987919183504, "Tyrone": 0.00020828993959591752, "Power": 0.00020828993959591752, "insisted": 0.00041657987919183504, "signing": 0.00020828993959591752, "contract": 0.0006248698187877526, "studio": 0.0006248698187877526, "Twentieth": 0.00020828993959591752, "CenturyFox": 0.00020828993959591752, "agreed": 0.00020828993959591752, "ultimately": 0.00020828993959591752, "nominated": 0.0008331597583836701, "consider": 0.00020828993959591752, "finest": 0.00020828993959591752, "Langs": 0.00020828993959591752, "Return": 0.00041657987919183504, "Gene": 0.00020828993959591752, "Tierney": 0.00041657987919183504, "Preston": 0.00041657987919183504, "Sturgess": 0.00020828993959591752, "teamed": 0.00041657987919183504, "successful": 0.0012497396375755051, "Rings": 0.00020828993959591752, "Her": 0.00020828993959591752, "Fingers": 0.00020828993959591752, "She": 0.0010414496979795876, "favorite": 0.00020828993959591752, "costars": 0.00041657987919183504, "three": 0.0012497396375755051, "acclaimed": 0.0006248698187877526, "enlisted": 0.00020828993959591752, "United": 0.0010414496979795876, "States": 0.0010414496979795876, "Navy": 0.0006248698187877526, "fight": 0.00041657987919183504, "World": 0.0008331597583836701, "War": 0.0012497396375755051, "II": 0.0010414496979795876, "saying": 0.00041657987919183504, "dont": 0.0014580295771714226, "want": 0.0006248698187877526, "fake": 0.00020828993959591752, "war": 0.0010414496979795876, "Previously": 0.00020828993959591752, "helped": 0.00041657987919183504, "raise": 0.00020828993959591752, "funds": 0.00020828993959591752, "defense": 0.00020828993959591752, "Britain": 0.00020828993959591752, "served": 0.00020828993959591752, "years": 0.0022911893355550927, "initially": 0.0006248698187877526, "Quartermaster": 0.00020828993959591752, "rd": 0.00020828993959591752, "Class": 0.00020828993959591752, "destroyer": 0.00020828993959591752, "USSSatterlee": 0.00020828993959591752, "commissioned": 0.00020828993959591752, "Lieutenant": 0.00020828993959591752, "Junior": 0.00020828993959591752, "Grade": 0.00020828993959591752, "Air": 0.00020828993959591752, "Combat": 0.00020828993959591752, "Intelligence": 0.00020828993959591752, "Central": 0.00020828993959591752, "Pacific": 0.00041657987919183504, "awarded": 0.00020828993959591752, "Bronze": 0.00020828993959591752, "Star": 0.00041657987919183504, "Medal": 0.00020828993959591752, "Presidential": 0.00020828993959591752, "Unit": 0.00020828993959591752, "Citation": 0.00020828993959591752, "movies": 0.00041657987919183504, "parties": 0.00041657987919183504, "civilian": 0.00020828993959591752, "would": 0.0012497396375755051, "listen": 0.00020828993959591752, "records": 0.00020828993959591752, "invite": 0.00020828993959591752, "Johnny": 0.00020828993959591752, "Mercer": 0.00020828993959591752, "Hoagy": 0.00020828993959591752, "Carmichael": 0.00020828993959591752, "Dinah": 0.00020828993959591752, "Shore": 0.00020828993959591752, "Nat": 0.00020828993959591752, "King": 0.00020828993959591752, "Cole": 0.00020828993959591752, "over": 0.00041657987919183504, "music": 0.00020828993959591752, "giving": 0.00020828993959591752, "piano": 0.00020828993959591752, "lessons": 0.00020828993959591752, "Wyatt": 0.00020828993959591752, "Earp": 0.00020828993959591752, "seven": 0.00020828993959591752, "postwar": 0.00020828993959591752, "until": 0.0008331597583836701, "Fox": 0.00020828993959591752, "expired": 0.00020828993959591752, "last": 0.0008331597583836701, "being": 0.0008331597583836701, "Otto": 0.00020828993959591752, "Premingers": 0.00020828993959591752, "Daisy": 0.00020828993959591752, "Kenyon": 0.00020828993959591752, "Joan": 0.00020828993959591752, "Crawford": 0.00020828993959591752, "Fugitive": 0.00020828993959591752, "Argosy": 0.00020828993959591752, "Pictures": 0.00020828993959591752, "subsequent": 0.00020828993959591752, "ArgosyFord": 0.00020828993959591752, "rigid": 0.00020828993959591752, "Army": 0.00020828993959591752, "along": 0.00041657987919183504, "Wayne": 0.00041657987919183504, "Shirley": 0.00020828993959591752, "Temple": 0.00020828993959591752, "adult": 0.00020828993959591752, "Refusing": 0.00020828993959591752, "another": 0.00020828993959591752, "longterm": 0.00020828993959591752, "wearing": 0.00041657987919183504, "officers": 0.00020828993959591752, "cap": 0.00020828993959591752, "originate": 0.00020828993959591752, "US": 0.00041657987919183504, "South": 0.00020828993959591752, "Ocean": 0.00020828993959591752, "junior": 0.00020828993959591752, "officer": 0.00020828993959591752, "Lt": 0.00020828993959591752, "Douglas": 0.00041657987919183504, "wages": 0.00020828993959591752, "private": 0.00041657987919183504, "against": 0.00041657987919183504, "tyrannical": 0.00020828993959591752, "captain": 0.00020828993959591752, "Tony": 0.00041657987919183504, "reprising": 0.00020828993959591752, "national": 0.00020828993959591752, "tour": 0.00020828993959591752, "runs": 0.00020828993959591752, "Point": 0.00020828993959591752, "Caine": 0.00020828993959591752, "Mutiny": 0.00020828993959591752, "CourtMartial": 0.00020828993959591752, "eightyear": 0.00020828993959591752, "absence": 0.00020828993959591752, "Cagney": 0.00020828993959591752, "Powell": 0.00020828993959591752, "Jack": 0.00041657987919183504, "Lemmon": 0.00020828993959591752, "continuing": 0.00020828993959591752, "pattern": 0.00020828993959591752, "bringing": 0.00020828993959591752, "big": 0.00020828993959591752, "blows": 0.00020828993959591752, "punched": 0.00020828993959591752, "filming": 0.0006248698187877526, "vowed": 0.00041657987919183504, "never": 0.0010414496979795876, "vow": 0.00020828993959591752, "spoke": 0.00020828993959591752, "glowingly": 0.00020828993959591752, "Bogdanovichs": 0.00020828993959591752, "documentary": 0.00041657987919183504, "Directed": 0.00041657987919183504, "alongside": 0.00020828993959591752, "refused": 0.00020828993959591752, "participate": 0.00020828993959591752, "learned": 0.00020828993959591752, "casting": 0.00020828993959591752, "reviving": 0.00020828993959591752, "concentrating": 0.00020828993959591752, "Paramount": 0.00020828993959591752, "Picturess": 0.00020828993959591752, "Leo": 0.00020828993959591752, "Tolstoys": 0.00020828993959591752, "Peace": 0.00020828993959591752, "French": 0.00020828993959591752, "Emperor": 0.00020828993959591752, "Napoleons": 0.00020828993959591752, "invasion": 0.00020828993959591752, "Russia": 0.00020828993959591752, "Pierre": 0.00020828993959591752, "Bezukhov": 0.00020828993959591752, "Audrey": 0.00020828993959591752, "shoot": 0.00020828993959591752, "Hitchcock": 0.00041657987919183504, "playing": 0.00020828993959591752, "falsely": 0.00020828993959591752, "accused": 0.00041657987919183504, "robbery": 0.00020828993959591752, "unusual": 0.00020828993959591752, "semidocumentary": 0.00020828993959591752, "actual": 0.00020828993959591752, "incident": 0.00041657987919183504, "partly": 0.00020828993959591752, "location": 0.00020828993959591752, "foray": 0.00020828993959591752, "producing": 0.00020828993959591752, "teleplay": 0.00020828993959591752, "script": 0.00020828993959591752, "Reginald": 0.00041657987919183504, "Rose": 0.00041657987919183504, "Lumet": 0.00020828993959591752, "lowbudget": 0.00020828993959591752, "completed": 0.00020828993959591752, "days": 0.00041657987919183504, "mostly": 0.00020828993959591752, "claustrophobic": 0.00020828993959591752, "jury": 0.00020828993959591752, "room": 0.00020828993959591752, "It": 0.00041657987919183504, "Klugman": 0.00020828993959591752, "Lee": 0.00041657987919183504, "J": 0.00041657987919183504, "Cobb": 0.00020828993959591752, "Martin": 0.0006248698187877526, "Balsam": 0.00020828993959591752, "E": 0.00041657987919183504, "G": 0.00041657987919183504, "Marshall": 0.00041657987919183504, "intense": 0.00020828993959591752, "story": 0.0008331597583836701, "twelve": 0.00020828993959591752, "jurors": 0.00020828993959591752, "deciding": 0.00020828993959591752, "fate": 0.00020828993959591752, "murder": 0.00020828993959591752, "well": 0.00041657987919183504, "critics": 0.0006248698187877526, "worldwide": 0.00020828993959591752, "shared": 0.00020828993959591752, "Globe": 0.00041657987919183504, "Early": 0.00020828993959591752, "drew": 0.00020828993959591752, "poorly": 0.00020828993959591752, "gaining": 0.00020828993959591752, "awards": 0.00041657987919183504, "proved": 0.00041657987919183504, "success": 0.00020828993959591752, "spite": 0.00020828993959591752, "outcome": 0.00020828993959591752, "produce": 0.00020828993959591752, "fearing": 0.00020828993959591752, "failing": 0.00020828993959591752, "producer": 0.00020828993959591752, "might": 0.00020828993959591752, "derail": 0.00020828993959591752, "Tin": 0.00020828993959591752, "Warlock": 0.00020828993959591752, "seat": 0.00020828993959591752, "NBC": 0.00041657987919183504, "television": 0.0022911893355550927, "series": 0.0008331597583836701, "Deputy": 0.00020828993959591752, "Marshal": 0.00020828993959591752, "Simon": 0.00020828993959591752, "Fry": 0.00020828993959591752, "Allen": 0.00020828993959591752, "Case": 0.00020828993959591752, "Read": 0.00020828993959591752, "Morgan": 0.00020828993959591752, "During": 0.00020828993959591752, "performed": 0.00041657987919183504, "number": 0.00041657987919183504, "epics": 0.00020828993959591752, "Longest": 0.00020828993959591752, "Day": 0.00020828993959591752, "Cinerama": 0.00020828993959591752, "How": 0.00020828993959591752, "Was": 0.00041657987919183504, "Won": 0.00020828993959591752, "Harms": 0.00020828993959591752, "Way": 0.00041657987919183504, "Cold": 0.00020828993959591752, "suspense": 0.00020828993959591752, "FailSafe": 0.00041657987919183504, "tries": 0.00020828993959591752, "avert": 0.00020828993959591752, "nuclear": 0.00020828993959591752, "holocaust": 0.00020828993959591752, "through": 0.0008331597583836701, "tense": 0.00020828993959591752, "negotiations": 0.00020828993959591752, "Soviets": 0.00020828993959591752, "bombers": 0.00020828993959591752, "are": 0.00041657987919183504, "mistakenly": 0.00020828993959591752, "ordered": 0.00020828993959591752, "attack": 0.00020828993959591752, "USSR": 0.00020828993959591752, "lighthearted": 0.00020828993959591752, "cinema": 0.00020828993959591752, "Spencers": 0.00020828993959591752, "Mountain": 0.00020828993959591752, "inspiration": 0.00020828993959591752, "TV": 0.00020828993959591752, "Waltons": 0.00020828993959591752, "memories": 0.00020828993959591752, "Earl": 0.00020828993959591752, "Hamner": 0.00020828993959591752, "Jr": 0.00041657987919183504, "type": 0.00020828993959591752, "turning": 0.00020828993959591752, "down": 0.00020828993959591752, "convinced": 0.00020828993959591752, "accept": 0.00020828993959591752, "Eli": 0.00020828993959591752, "Wallach": 0.00020828993959591752, "Sergio": 0.00020828993959591752, "Leone": 0.00041657987919183504, "previously": 0.00020828993959591752, "tried": 0.00020828993959591752, "hire": 0.00020828993959591752, "portray": 0.00020828993959591752, "Name": 0.00041657987919183504, "Dollars": 0.00020828993959591752, "Trilogy": 0.00020828993959591752, "taken": 0.00020828993959591752, "Clint": 0.00020828993959591752, "Eastwood": 0.00020828993959591752, "flew": 0.00020828993959591752, "persuade": 0.00020828993959591752, "planned": 0.00020828993959591752, "pair": 0.00020828993959591752, "browncolored": 0.00020828993959591752, "lenses": 0.00020828993959591752, "paradox": 0.00020828993959591752, "contrasting": 0.00020828993959591752, "closeup": 0.00020828993959591752, "shots": 0.00020828993959591752, "innocentlooking": 0.00020828993959591752, "blue": 0.00020828993959591752, "eyes": 0.00020828993959591752, "vicious": 0.00020828993959591752, "character": 0.0006248698187877526, "portrayed": 0.00020828993959591752, "survived": 0.00020828993959591752, "disagreements": 0.00020828993959591752, "liberal": 0.00020828993959591752, "Democrat": 0.00020828993959591752, "conservative": 0.00020828993959591752, "Republican": 0.0008331597583836701, "heated": 0.00020828993959591752, "argument": 0.00020828993959591752, "talking": 0.00041657987919183504, "each": 0.00020828993959591752, "other": 0.0006248698187877526, "Firecreek": 0.00020828993959591752, "heavy": 0.00020828993959591752, "Cheyenne": 0.00041657987919183504, "Social": 0.00041657987919183504, "Club": 0.00041657987919183504, "humorously": 0.00020828993959591752, "argued": 0.00020828993959591752, "Merry": 0.00020828993959591752, "episodic": 0.00020828993959591752, "Demarest": 0.00020828993959591752, "featured": 0.0006248698187877526, "grownup": 0.00020828993959591752, "Carl": 0.00020828993959591752, "Alfalfa": 0.00020828993959591752, "Switzer": 0.00020828993959591752, "acted": 0.00041657987919183504, "child": 0.00020828993959591752, "Gang": 0.00020828993959591752, "serials": 0.00020828993959591752, "approaching": 0.00020828993959591752, "seventies": 0.00020828993959591752, "continued": 0.0008331597583836701, "theater": 0.00020828993959591752, "Late": 0.00020828993959591752, "Hero": 0.00020828993959591752, "secondary": 0.00020828993959591752, "Crooked": 0.00020828993959591752, "Paris": 0.00020828993959591752, "Pitman": 0.00020828993959591752, "Kirk": 0.00020828993959591752, "trying": 0.00041657987919183504, "escape": 0.00020828993959591752, "Arizona": 0.00020828993959591752, "prison": 0.00020828993959591752, "both": 0.0006248698187877526, "foreign": 0.00041657987919183504, "provided": 0.00041657987919183504, "sustenance": 0.00020828993959591752, "decade": 0.00020828993959591752, "aging": 0.00020828993959591752, "suffered": 0.00041657987919183504, "waning": 0.00020828993959591752, "careers": 0.00020828993959591752, "ABC": 0.00041657987919183504, "Family": 0.00020828993959591752, "between": 0.0008331597583836701, "TVmovie": 0.00020828993959591752, "Red": 0.00020828993959591752, "Pony": 0.00020828993959591752, "earned": 0.0006248698187877526, "Emmy": 0.00020828993959591752, "nomination": 0.00020828993959591752, "unsuccessful": 0.00020828993959591752, "melodrama": 0.00020828993959591752, "Ash": 0.00020828993959591752, "Wednesday": 0.00020828993959591752, "released": 0.0006248698187877526, "Is": 0.00020828993959591752, "Nobody": 0.00020828993959591752, "presented": 0.00041657987919183504, "rare": 0.00020828993959591752, "comedic": 0.00020828993959591752, "old": 0.0006248698187877526, "gunslinger": 0.00020828993959591752, "whose": 0.00020828993959591752, "plans": 0.00020828993959591752, "retire": 0.00020828993959591752, "dampened": 0.00020828993959591752, "fan": 0.00020828993959591752, "sorts": 0.00020828993959591752, "throughout": 0.00020828993959591752, "demanding": 0.00020828993959591752, "plays": 0.00041657987919183504, "biographical": 0.00020828993959591752, "drama": 0.00041657987919183504, "Clarence": 0.00041657987919183504, "Darrow": 0.00020828993959591752, "deteriorating": 0.00020828993959591752, "outward": 0.00020828993959591752, "symptoms": 0.00020828993959591752, "occurred": 0.00020828993959591752, "April": 0.00041657987919183504, "collapsed": 0.00020828993959591752, "exhaustion": 0.00020828993959591752, "appearance": 0.00041657987919183504, "cardiac": 0.00020828993959591752, "arrhythmia": 0.00020828993959591752, "prostate": 0.00041657987919183504, "cancer": 0.0006248698187877526, "pacemaker": 0.00020828993959591752, "installed": 0.00020828993959591752, "following": 0.00020828993959591752, "surgery": 0.00020828993959591752, "run": 0.00020828993959591752, "First": 0.00020828993959591752, "Monday": 0.00020828993959591752, "October": 0.00020828993959591752, "advice": 0.00020828993959591752, "revival": 0.00020828993959591752, "Your": 0.00020828993959591752, "Life": 0.00020828993959591752, "opened": 0.00020828993959591752, "March": 0.00020828993959591752, "Huntington": 0.00020828993959591752, "Hartford": 0.00020828993959591752, "Theater": 0.00041657987919183504, "Los": 0.00041657987919183504, "Angeles": 0.00041657987919183504, "Richard": 0.0008331597583836701, "Dreyfuss": 0.00020828993959591752, "Gloria": 0.00020828993959591752, "Grahame": 0.00020828993959591752, "Ron": 0.00020828993959591752, "Thompson": 0.00041657987919183504, "Strother": 0.00020828993959591752, "Alexander": 0.00020828993959591752, "Lewis": 0.00020828993959591752, "Stadlen": 0.00020828993959591752, "X": 0.00020828993959591752, "Slattery": 0.00020828993959591752, "Pepper": 0.00020828993959591752, "Edwin": 0.00020828993959591752, "Sherin": 0.00020828993959591752, "directing": 0.00020828993959591752, "notable": 0.00020828993959591752, "Collision": 0.00020828993959591752, "Course": 0.00020828993959591752, "volatile": 0.00020828993959591752, "Harry": 0.00020828993959591752, "Truman": 0.00020828993959591752, "General": 0.00020828993959591752, "MacArthur": 0.00020828993959591752, "produced": 0.00020828993959591752, "Showtime": 0.00020828993959591752, "broadcast": 0.00020828993959591752, "Almos": 0.00020828993959591752, "Wright": 0.00020828993959591752, "miniseries": 0.00041657987919183504, "Captains": 0.00020828993959591752, "Kings": 0.00020828993959591752, "Taylor": 0.00020828993959591752, "Caldwells": 0.00020828993959591752, "Three": 0.00020828993959591752, "ABCs": 0.00020828993959591752, "Roots": 0.00041657987919183504, "Next": 0.00020828993959591752, "Generations": 0.00020828993959591752, "overshadowed": 0.00020828993959591752, "predecessor": 0.00020828993959591752, "blockbuster": 0.00041657987919183504, "finished": 0.00020828993959591752, "disaster": 0.00041657987919183504, "killer": 0.00041657987919183504, "octopus": 0.00020828993959591752, "Tentacles": 0.00020828993959591752, "Rollercoaster": 0.00020828993959591752, "Widmark": 0.00041657987919183504, "Helen": 0.00020828993959591752, "Hunt": 0.00020828993959591752, "Olivia": 0.00020828993959591752, "de": 0.00041657987919183504, "Havilland": 0.00020828993959591752, "Jos\u00e9": 0.00020828993959591752, "Ferrer": 0.00020828993959591752, "bee": 0.00020828993959591752, "action": 0.00020828993959591752, "Swarm": 0.00020828993959591752, "global": 0.00020828993959591752, "Meteor": 0.00020828993959591752, "second": 0.00020828993959591752, "sitting": 0.00020828993959591752, "Sean": 0.00020828993959591752, "Connery": 0.00020828993959591752, "Natalie": 0.00020828993959591752, "Wood": 0.00020828993959591752, "Karl": 0.00020828993959591752, "Malden": 0.00020828993959591752, "Canadian": 0.00020828993959591752, "Fire": 0.00020828993959591752, "Shelley": 0.00020828993959591752, "Winters": 0.00020828993959591752, "Ava": 0.00020828993959591752, "Gardner": 0.00020828993959591752, "Wanda": 0.00020828993959591752, "Nevada": 0.00020828993959591752, "Brooke": 0.00020828993959591752, "Shields": 0.00020828993959591752, "As": 0.00041657987919183504, "declined": 0.00020828993959591752, "breaks": 0.00020828993959591752, "acknowledge": 0.00041657987919183504, "value": 0.00020828993959591752, "extensive": 0.00020828993959591752, "body": 0.00041657987919183504, "Plate": 0.00041657987919183504, "Achievement": 0.00041657987919183504, "Council": 0.00020828993959591752, "inducted": 0.00020828993959591752, "Hall": 0.00020828993959591752, "Fame": 0.00020828993959591752, "achievements": 0.00020828993959591752, "Lifetime": 0.00020828993959591752, "Globes": 0.00020828993959591752, "respectively": 0.00020828993959591752, "act": 0.00020828993959591752, "before": 0.00041657987919183504, "death": 0.0010414496979795876, "works": 0.00041657987919183504, "included": 0.00041657987919183504, "live": 0.00020828993959591752, "Joness": 0.00020828993959591752, "Oldest": 0.00020828993959591752, "Living": 0.00020828993959591752, "Graduate": 0.00020828993959591752, "Emmynominated": 0.00020828993959591752, "Gideons": 0.00041657987919183504, "Trumpet": 0.00020828993959591752, "Fay": 0.00020828993959591752, "Wray": 0.00020828993959591752, "have": 0.0006248698187877526, "right": 0.00020828993959591752, "publicly": 0.00020828993959591752, "funded": 0.00020828993959591752, "legal": 0.00020828993959591752, "counsel": 0.00020828993959591752, "indigent": 0.00020828993959591752, "Ernest": 0.00020828993959591752, "Thompsons": 0.00020828993959591752, "marked": 0.00020828993959591752, "personal": 0.00020828993959591752, "triumph": 0.00020828993959591752, "Mark": 0.00020828993959591752, "Rydell": 0.00020828993959591752, "project": 0.00020828993959591752, "unprecedented": 0.00020828993959591752, "collaborations": 0.00020828993959591752, "elder": 0.00020828993959591752, "emotionally": 0.00041657987919183504, "brittle": 0.00020828993959591752, "distant": 0.00041657987919183504, "becomes": 0.00020828993959591752, "accessible": 0.00020828993959591752, "has": 0.0006248698187877526, "elements": 0.00020828993959591752, "mimicked": 0.00020828993959591752, "reallife": 0.00020828993959591752, "them": 0.00041657987919183504, "resolve": 0.00020828993959591752, "certain": 0.00020828993959591752, "issues": 0.00020828993959591752, "bought": 0.00020828993959591752, "rights": 0.00020828993959591752, "hope": 0.00020828993959591752, "described": 0.0010414496979795876, "gift": 0.00020828993959591752, "my": 0.00041657987919183504, "so": 0.0006248698187877526, "unbelievably": 0.00020828993959591752, "Premiered": 0.00020828993959591752, "December": 0.0006248698187877526, "limited": 0.00020828993959591752, "developed": 0.0006248698187877526, "audience": 0.00020828993959591752, "January": 0.00041657987919183504, "With": 0.00020828993959591752, "nearly": 0.00020828993959591752, "million": 0.00020828993959591752, "becoming": 0.00020828993959591752, "unexpected": 0.00020828993959591752, "addition": 0.00020828993959591752, "wins": 0.00020828993959591752, "Actress": 0.00041657987919183504, "Screenplay": 0.00020828993959591752, "only": 0.0006248698187877526, "Oscar": 0.00041657987919183504, "oldest": 0.00020828993959591752, "recipient": 0.00020828993959591752, "point": 0.00041657987919183504, "accepted": 0.00020828993959591752, "behalf": 0.00020828993959591752, "accepting": 0.00020828993959591752, "dad": 0.00020828993959591752, "probably": 0.00020828993959591752, "quip": 0.00020828993959591752, "Well": 0.00020828993959591752, "aint": 0.00020828993959591752, "lucky": 0.00020828993959591752, "Years": 0.00041657987919183504, "remembered": 0.00020828993959591752, "brutally": 0.00020828993959591752, "honest": 0.00020828993959591752, "portrayal": 0.00020828993959591752, "frightened": 0.00020828993959591752, "Summer": 0.00020828993959591752, "Solstice": 0.00020828993959591752, "Myrna": 0.00020828993959591752, "Loy": 0.00020828993959591752, "wrapped": 0.00020828993959591752, "rapidly": 0.00020828993959591752, "declining": 0.00020828993959591752, "married": 0.0010414496979795876, "times": 0.00020828993959591752, "children": 0.0006248698187877526, "adopted": 0.00041657987919183504, "ended": 0.00020828993959591752, "separation": 0.00020828993959591752, "finalized": 0.00020828993959591752, "divorce": 0.00041657987919183504, "Frances": 0.0012497396375755051, "Seymour": 0.00041657987919183504, "Brokaw": 0.00041657987919183504, "widow": 0.00020828993959591752, "wealthy": 0.00020828993959591752, "industrialist": 0.00020828993959591752, "George": 0.00020828993959591752, "Tuttle": 0.00020828993959591752, "Brokaws": 0.00041657987919183504, "Villiers": 0.00020828993959591752, "nicknamed": 0.00020828993959591752, "Pan": 0.00020828993959591752, "born": 0.0010414496979795876, "met": 0.00041657987919183504, "Denham": 0.00020828993959591752, "Studios": 0.00020828993959591752, "England": 0.00020828993959591752, "Wings": 0.00020828993959591752, "Morning": 0.00020828993959591752, "British": 0.00020828993959591752, "picture": 0.00020828993959591752, "February": 0.00020828993959591752, "whom": 0.00020828993959591752, "Oscars": 0.00020828993959591752, "wanted": 0.00041657987919183504, "could": 0.00041657987919183504, "remarry": 0.00020828993959591752, "happy": 0.00020828993959591752, "ones": 0.00020828993959591752, "Devastated": 0.00020828993959591752, "confession": 0.00020828993959591752, "plagued": 0.00020828993959591752, "emotional": 0.00041657987919183504, "problems": 0.00041657987919183504, "went": 0.00020828993959591752, "Austen": 0.00041657987919183504, "Riggs": 0.00041657987919183504, "Psychiatric": 0.00020828993959591752, "Hospital": 0.00020828993959591752, "treatment": 0.00020828993959591752, "committed": 0.00020828993959591752, "suicide": 0.00020828993959591752, "there": 0.0006248698187877526, "Before": 0.00020828993959591752, "she": 0.0014580295771714226, "written": 0.00041657987919183504, "notes": 0.00020828993959591752, "various": 0.00020828993959591752, "individuals": 0.00020828993959591752, "message": 0.00020828993959591752, "husband": 0.00020828993959591752, "arranged": 0.00020828993959591752, "funeral": 0.00041657987919183504, "himself": 0.0006248698187877526, "motherinlaw": 0.00020828993959591752, "Sophie": 0.00020828993959591752, "attendance": 0.00020828993959591752, "Dr": 0.00020828993959591752, "Gibson": 0.00020828993959591752, "psychiatrist": 0.00020828993959591752, "treated": 0.00020828993959591752, "cold": 0.00020828993959591752, "selfabsorbed": 0.00020828993959591752, "person": 0.00020828993959591752, "complete": 0.00020828993959591752, "narcissist": 0.00020828993959591752, "Susan": 0.00041657987919183504, "Blanchard": 0.00041657987919183504, "mistress": 0.00020828993959591752, "Australianborn": 0.00020828993959591752, "interior": 0.00020828993959591752, "designer": 0.00020828993959591752, "Dorothy": 0.00020828993959591752, "Hammerstein": 0.00041657987919183504, "stepdaughter": 0.00020828993959591752, "Together": 0.00020828993959591752, "Amy": 0.00020828993959591752, "Fishman": 0.00020828993959591752, "divorced": 0.00041657987919183504, "awe": 0.00020828993959591752, "geisha": 0.00020828993959591752, "doing": 0.00020828993959591752, "please": 0.00020828993959591752, "dealing": 0.00020828993959591752, "solving": 0.00020828993959591752, "baroness": 0.00020828993959591752, "Afdera": 0.00041657987919183504, "Franchetti": 0.00020828993959591752, "Shirlee": 0.00041657987919183504, "Mae": 0.00020828993959591752, "Adams": 0.00020828993959591752, "loathed": 0.00020828993959591752, "displays": 0.00020828993959591752, "feeling": 0.00041657987919183504, "or": 0.00041657987919183504, "others": 0.00020828993959591752, "consistent": 0.00020828993959591752, "Whenever": 0.00020828993959591752, "felt": 0.00041657987919183504, "wall": 0.00020828993959591752, "breached": 0.00020828993959591752, "outbursts": 0.00020828993959591752, "anger": 0.00020828993959591752, "exhibiting": 0.00020828993959591752, "furious": 0.00020828993959591752, "temper": 0.00020828993959591752, "terrified": 0.00020828993959591752, "autobiography": 0.00020828993959591752, "Dont": 0.00020828993959591752, "Tell": 0.00020828993959591752, "Dad": 0.00020828993959591752, "how": 0.0006248698187877526, "sure": 0.00020828993959591752, "volunteered": 0.00020828993959591752, "loved": 0.00020828993959591752, "finally": 0.00020828993959591752, "heard": 0.00020828993959591752, "love": 0.00020828993959591752, "you": 0.00041657987919183504, "rejected": 0.00020828993959591752, "friendships": 0.00020828993959591752, "Their": 0.00020828993959591752, "extremely": 0.00020828993959591752, "strained": 0.00020828993959591752, "leftwing": 0.00020828993959591752, "activist": 0.00020828993959591752, "reported": 0.00041657987919183504, "detached": 0.00020828993959591752, "Strasberg": 0.0008331597583836701, "while": 0.00041657987919183504, "visiting": 0.00020828993959591752, "Malibu": 0.00020828993959591752, "families": 0.00020828993959591752, "neighbors": 0.00020828993959591752, "friendship": 0.00020828993959591752, "Strasbergs": 0.00020828993959591752, "studying": 0.00020828993959591752, "techniques": 0.00020828993959591752, "Method": 0.0012497396375755051, "renowned": 0.00020828993959591752, "proponent": 0.00020828993959591752, "pivotal": 0.00020828993959591752, "skill": 0.00020828993959591752, "actress": 0.00020828993959591752, "frustrated": 0.00020828993959591752, "talent": 0.00020828993959591752, "demonstration": 0.00020828993959591752, "effortless": 0.00020828993959591752, "ardent": 0.00020828993959591752, "supporter": 0.00020828993959591752, "Democratic": 0.00020828993959591752, "Party": 0.00020828993959591752, "admirer": 0.00020828993959591752, "Franklin": 0.00020828993959591752, "D": 0.00041657987919183504, "Roosevelt": 0.00020828993959591752, "campaign": 0.00020828993959591752, "commercial": 0.00020828993959591752, "presidential": 0.00020828993959591752, "candidate": 0.00020828993959591752, "F": 0.00020828993959591752, "Kennedy": 0.00020828993959591752, "ad": 0.00020828993959591752, "Kennedys": 0.00020828993959591752, "naval": 0.00020828993959591752, "specifically": 0.00020828993959591752, "PT": 0.00020828993959591752, "registered": 0.00020828993959591752, "switched": 0.00020828993959591752, "because": 0.00041657987919183504, "party": 0.00020828993959591752, "represent": 0.00020828993959591752, "values": 0.00020828993959591752, "late": 0.00041657987919183504, "asked": 0.00041657987919183504, "prepared": 0.00020828993959591752, "going": 0.00020828993959591752, "baffled": 0.00020828993959591752, "answer": 0.00020828993959591752, "know": 0.0008331597583836701, "stand": 0.00020828993959591752, "think": 0.00020828993959591752, "writer": 0.00020828993959591752, "Al": 0.00020828993959591752, "Aronowitz": 0.00041657987919183504, "working": 0.00020828993959591752, "profile": 0.00020828993959591752, "Saturday": 0.00020828993959591752, "Evening": 0.00020828993959591752, "Post": 0.00041657987919183504, "method": 0.0006248698187877526, "cant": 0.0010414496979795876, "articulate": 0.0008331597583836701, "told": 0.00020828993959591752, "me": 0.0006248698187877526, "studied": 0.00020828993959591752, "mean": 0.00020828993959591752, "suggest": 0.00020828993959591752, "any": 0.00020828993959591752, "feelings": 0.00020828993959591752, "way": 0.00041657987919183504, "itI": 0.00020828993959591752, "care": 0.00020828993959591752, "Everybodys": 0.00020828993959591752, "Everybody": 0.00020828993959591752, "if": 0.00020828993959591752, "methodand": 0.00020828993959591752, "says": 0.00020828993959591752, "use": 0.00020828993959591752, "capital": 0.00020828993959591752, "letter": 0.00020828993959591752, "without": 0.00020828993959591752, "aware": 0.00020828993959591752, "Maybe": 0.00020828993959591752, "do": 0.0006248698187877526, "doesnt": 0.00020828993959591752, "matter": 0.00020828993959591752, "just": 0.00020828993959591752, "Hes": 0.00020828993959591752, "conscious": 0.00020828993959591752, "does": 0.00020828993959591752, "nervous": 0.00020828993959591752, "And": 0.00020828993959591752, "sensed": 0.00020828993959591752, "immediately": 0.00020828993959591752, "we": 0.00020828993959591752, "very": 0.00020828993959591752, "little": 0.00020828993959591752, "ithe": 0.00020828993959591752, "Shut": 0.00020828993959591752, "hear": 0.00020828993959591752, "tell": 0.00020828993959591752, "make": 0.00020828993959591752, "fun": 0.00020828993959591752, "home": 0.00041657987919183504, "side": 0.00020828993959591752, "day": 0.00020828993959591752, "directly": 0.00020828993959591752, "cause": 0.00020828993959591752, "noted": 0.00020828993959591752, "concurrent": 0.00020828993959591752, "ailment": 0.00020828993959591752, "certificate": 0.00020828993959591752, "requested": 0.00020828993959591752, "held": 0.00020828993959591752, "cremated": 0.00020828993959591752, "Ronald": 0.00020828993959591752, "Reagan": 0.00020828993959591752, "former": 0.00020828993959591752, "hailed": 0.00020828993959591752, "true": 0.00020828993959591752, "dedicated": 0.00020828993959591752, "excellence": 0.00020828993959591752, "craft": 0.00020828993959591752, "graced": 0.00020828993959591752, "sincerity": 0.00020828993959591752, "accuracy": 0.00020828993959591752, "legend": 0.00020828993959591752, "preserved": 0.00020828993959591752, "Stuhr": 0.00020828993959591752, "Museum": 0.00020828993959591752, "Prairie": 0.00020828993959591752, "Pioneer": 0.00020828993959591752, "recognized": 0.00020828993959591752, "greats": 0.00020828993959591752, "era": 0.00020828993959591752, "centenary": 0.00020828993959591752, "birth": 0.00020828993959591752, "Turner": 0.00020828993959591752, "TCM": 0.00020828993959591752, "honored": 0.00020828993959591752, "marathon": 0.00020828993959591752, "Office": 0.00020828993959591752, "cent": 0.00020828993959591752, "postage": 0.00020828993959591752, "stamp": 0.00020828993959591752, "artists": 0.00020828993959591752, "legends": 0.00020828993959591752, "Theatre": 0.00020828993959591752, "originally": 0.00020828993959591752, "known": 0.00020828993959591752, "Carter": 0.00020828993959591752, "DeHaven": 0.00020828993959591752, "Music": 0.00020828993959591752, "Box": 0.00020828993959591752, "Nederlander": 0.00020828993959591752, "Organization": 0.00020828993959591752, "Joseph": 0.00020828993959591752, "Hellers": 0.00020828993959591752, "satirical": 0.00020828993959591752, "Catch": 0.00041657987919183504, "running": 0.00020828993959591752, "joke": 0.00020828993959591752, "fictional": 0.00020828993959591752, "Major": 0.0008331597583836701, "resembles": 0.00020828993959591752, "Philip": 0.00020828993959591752, "Beidler": 0.00020828993959591752, "comments": 0.00020828993959591752, "novels": 0.00020828993959591752, "great": 0.00020828993959591752, "absurd": 0.00020828993959591752, "jokes": 0.00020828993959591752, "bewildering": 0.00020828993959591752, "resemblance": 0.00020828993959591752, "Taking": 0.00020828993959591752, "account": 0.00020828993959591752, "likely": 0.00020828993959591752, "refers": 0.00020828993959591752, "circa": 0.00020828993959591752, "From": 0.00020828993959591752, "beginning": 0.00020828993959591752, "projects": 0.00020828993959591752, "programs": 0.00020828993959591752, "shorts": 0.00020828993959591752, "Through": 0.00020828993959591752, "course": 0.00020828993959591752, "Westerns": 0.00020828993959591752, "villainous": 0.00020828993959591752, "frequent": 0.00020828993959591752, "appearances": 0.00020828993959591752, "total": 4801}